---
layout: episode
number: 4
title: The Astronomical Diaries
date: 2021-4-27
description: |
    We step back and look at Babylon's broader political history and see how
    Babylonian astronomy changes during the rise of the Neo-Babylonian Empire
    and the Persian Conquest. Then we look at some of the types of astronomical
    records the Babylonians produced, particularly the Astronomical Diaries,
    the longest continuous research program of any society in history.
categories: episodes
---

## Transcript

Good evening, and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy with new episodes every full moon.  My name is Joe Antognini.  We've
been talking about the astronomy of Babylonia for a couple of episodes now and
I've tried to convey to you a feel for the kinds of problems that Babylonian
astronomers were trying to solve, the phenomena they were interested in, and
some of the methods they used to solve these problems.  We looked at some of
the ways that they determined how many months would be in a year, how many days
were in a month, when lunar eclipses would happen, and we looked at how
astronomical phenomena were used as a source of omens.  But our examination of
Babylonian astronomy has been generally limited to older periods of Babylonian
history.  In fact, 626 BC, specifically is the year that I will use to
demarcate our discussion of the older Babylonian astronomy in previous episodes
with the Babylonian astronomy we will discuss in this and future episodes.  It
is a somewhat arbitrary cutoff for the astronomy of the time, but is a good
choice based on the larger political events in the region.  At this point I
want to take a step back and become a little more familiar with the broader
geopolitical situation in ancient Mesopotamia, because the astronomy broadly
changes around this time, or at least our modern perception of it does, as does
the political situation of Babylon.

Now we have to remember that Babylon always existed in the context of a fairly
integrated Mesopotamian world.  The political landscape of the near east was
largely driven by the so-called fertile crescent. This was, as its name
implies, a crescent-shaped swath of land that started with the Nile in the
southwest, extended up along the Nile, along the Mediterranean coast through
the Levant in modern-day Israel and Lebanon, turned east across the southern
border of modern-day Turkey, and then traced its way southeast along the Tigris
and Euphrates rivers in modern-day Iraq until it terminated at the Persian
Gulf.  This area of land was a more-or-less unbroken region with easily
available water surrounded by otherwise arid lands.  

Because of this continuous stretch of land with relatively accessible water,
and good soil, civilizations in this region could easily travel between each
other to trade, exchange cultural ideas, and, frequently, fight with each other.
Indeed the Hebrew Bible is full of stories of conquest and defeat between the
ancient Israelites and dozens of different peoples of the region: Hittites,
Canaanites, Kushites, Kassites, Amorites, Babylonians, Assyrians.  The list
goes on.  But the cultures of the region had many similarities as well due to
their frequent contact among one another.

The city of Babylon was built along the Euphrates river, perhaps sometime in
the late 2200s BC.  Sometime in the 1800s BC Babylon gained its independence
from neighboring city-states, built walls, and became a city-state in its own
right.  This began the Old Babylonian Empire, whose most famous ruler was King
Hammurabi.  As I discussed in Episode 2, our dates for kings during this period
are still uncertain with the different chronologies being separated by the 64
year periodicity of the recorded phenomena of Venus.

Around 1600 BC the Old Babylonian Empire was defeated by the Hittite Empire.
The Hittites originated in modern-day Turkey, however, and were not able to
maintain control over so distant a land.  A group originated from the mountains
that today border Iraq and Iran, just east of the Tigris river, the Kassites,
subsequently took control and reigned for about 400 years.  So we had
independence for Babylon for a few centuries with the Old Babylonian Empire,
followed by about 400 years of Kassite rule.

Then came the Late Bronze Age Collapse.  Sometime around 1200 BC, for
mysterious reasons, catastrophe struck in the Babylonian Period.  Within a span
of a few decades, kingdoms all across the fertile crescent collapsed.
Sophisticated city economies were replaced seemingly overnight by small, local
village economies.  This collapse appears to have been more sudden and more
thorough than the collapse of the Roman Empire some 1500 years later.  Perhaps
in part because of this event it is very hard to know much detail about
civilizations prior to this.  We do have some astronomical records prior to the
Late Bronze Age Collapse, some of which I described in earlier episodes, but
there are not many.  This event may be the origin of the myths of a past golden
age described by the Greek writer Hesiod and lost cities and peoples like
Atlantis.

Well, the Kassites were among the victims of the Late Bronze Age Collapse.
Whatever the cause of the collapse, the native Akkadian peoples were once again
able to reassert control over Babylon.  But the recovery from the Late Bronze
Age collapse was slow and the kingdoms of this Middle Babylonian period were
weak.  Finally, in 911 BC the Assyrians conquered the lands and Babylon became
subject to the Neo-Assyrian Empire.  While the chronologies prior to the Late
Bronze Age Collapse are uncertain, by the time we get to the Neo-Assyrian
empire, the chronology becomes much more secure.

Well Babylon managed to throw off the yoke of its oppressors once more in 626
BC.  After three centuries of subjugation, a native Babylonian king succeeded
in rebelling against the foreign rulers and establishing a Babylonian kingdom
at long last, known as the Neo-Babylonian Empire.  Under its second king,
Nebuchadnezzar II, the Neo-Babylonian Empire conquered a swath of land along
the fertile crescent up to Egypt.  Among these lands, were of course, the lands
of ancient Judea.  The Babylonian conquest of Judea features prominently
throughout various books of the Hebrew Bible.  During the Babylonian captivity,
the Temple of Solomon was destroyed, Jerusalem was sacked, and the Jews were
driven from their lands.  Understandably, Nebuchadnezzar does not come out
looking all that great in the Bible.  The heroic king of one people is the
arch-villain of another.

But the Neo-Babylonian Empire was not to be an empire for the ages.  The
Neo-Babylonian Empire lasted only about 100 years before the Persian King Cyrus
the Great conquered Babylon.  Persia had been growing rapidly under King Cyrus.
Cyrus had expanded out of modern-day Iran, capturing lands up to modern-day
India, Afghanistan, and then swept north above the Neo-Babylonian empire to
capture land in Armenia and modern-day Turkey, all the way up to Greece.  Cyrus
essentially had the Neo-Babylonian empire surrounded on the north, east, and
west, and the lands to the south were all desert.  So Babylon was not at all in
a good position.  The tale of its capture is disputed in the historical
sources.  The Babylonian accounts of this capture are fairly non-eventful.  A
relatively contemporaneous Babylonian account, the so-called Nabonidus
Chronicle, states that Cyrus defeated the Babylonian armies on the banks of the
Tigris River at the Battle of Opis and then took several cities without any
additional struggle, Babylon being among them.

According to an account written several centuries later by the Babylonian
astronomer Berossus, actually one of the few Babylonian astronomers whose name
we know, the Babylonian king fled, but soon surrendered to Cyrus who apparently
took kindly to a peaceful surrender and gave the deposed king an estate in the
country where he lived out the rest of his days.  Granted, that estate was in
Persia, presumably where Cyrus could keep a closer eye on him, but
nevertheless, it appears to be a more generous fate than one might have
expected.

The Greek tales of the capture of Babylon are considerably more interesting.
In the Greek accounts, after defeating the Babylonian forces at the Battle of
Opis, Cyrus faces a problem when he then tries to take Babylon and finds
himself confronted with the impenetrable walls of the city.  Well, of course
the Euphrates river runs through the city to supply it with water.  Now the
Babylonians were well aware that this was a potential vulnerability, so they
had constructed a metal grate that went below the river to prevent anyone from
entering the city via the river.  But Cyrus had an idea.  Cyrus had his troops
dig a canal upriver to divert enough water out of the Euphrates to lower the
water level so that his troops could pass under the metal grate and into the
city.  Cyrus had chosen to implement his plan during a festival when the city
was distracted so that his forces could enter unnoticed and took the city
without much resistance.

Now, modern historians regard the Greek version as fiction, perhaps drawn from
folk tales in the region.  Nevertheless, one point of contact between the Greek
histories and the Babylonian histories was their broadly moralizing character.
And this was not limited to these two groups.  The ancient Israelite histories
are moralizing in the same way, as are later Roman histories.  Moral history
was the predominant, perhaps exclusive mode of historical writing throughout
the ancient world.  In moral history, the point of telling the historical story
is to convey a moral lesson to the reader.  If, for example, you read the
historical books of the Old Testament, the Book of Kings, Chronicles, and so
forth, you'll find that how good a Jewish king was depended on how faithful he
was to God and the law.  If he was faithful and upheld the law, Israel
prospered --- battles were won, enemies were slain.  If he was unfaithful and
worshipped other gods, Israel grew weak and lost lands.  And if this infidelity
went on for too long, Jerusalem itself would inevitably fall, by none other
than the Babylonians as it happened.  Well if you read the Babylonian histories
you see the same story but in reverse.  When the Babylonian king is faithful to
Marduk, Babylonia suffers no defeat and rules victorious over all.  But when
kings are not faithful to Marduk, Babylon grows weak and falls prey to foreign
invaders.

Well evidently King Nabonidus was not faithful to Marduk because he was
defeated by the Persian King Cyrus in 626 BC and Babylon lost its independence.
Now you might have expected that the foreign conquest of Babylon would have
been bad for Babylonian astronomy.  It certainly had the potential for
catastrophe.  But nothing of the sort happened under King Cyrus the Great.  To
the contrary, Babylonian astronomy under Cyrus the Great flourished.  Why this
is is not exactly clear.  The Persian Empire was not particularly interested in
Babylonian astronomy and didn't subsidize or support it in any direct way.
After all, a large part of Babylonian astronomy was concerned with diving the
intentions of the gods Marduk, Ishtar, and Nergal.  What did the Persians care
what the local gods of the Babylonians had to say?  And this went the other way
--- without a Mesopotamian king to interpret omens for, what was the point of
Babylonian astrology?  During this period the influence of astrology wanes
relative to the more scientific astronomical observations, using the
anachronistic term "scientific".  Mesopotamian astrology loses some of its
judicial character and develops a more personal flavor.  This actually presents
a bit of conundrum --- why bother keeping these detailed astronomical records
if you couldn't do any valuable astrology with them?  Perhaps the priests were
carrying on their tradition for a time when a Babylonian king would reign once
again.

Well at any rate, King Cyrus was a remarkably pluralistic kind of king.  Unlike
the Babylonians, he did not care what gods his subjects worshiped as long as
they paid him tribute and sent him their quota of conscripts to fill his
armies.  He permitted a large degree of local autonomy, including religious
freedom, throughout his empire.  It was thanks to this broad religious
tolerance that the Jews were permitted to return to Judea, rebuild the temple,
and begin worshiping the god of Abraham according to their traditional rites
once again.  Like the Babylonian conqueror Nebuchadnezzar, King Cyrus, too,
appears in several places in the Hebrew Bible, but unlike Nebuchadnezzar, he
gets a much better treatment.

By the time of his death, the Persian Empire under King Cyrus had become the
largest the world had yet seen.  Such a vast empire necessitated a new kind of
governance, and Cyrus was highly adept at appropriating local customs and
institutions to build a decentralized empire that he could manage from the
distance of his capital in Pasargadae.  One of the most remarkable artifacts
from the period is the Cyrus Cylinder, discovered in 1879.  It was traditional
for Babylonian kings to begin their reign with a public declaration of the
reasons for their legitimacy and to perform certain rituals.  Among these was a
practice of burying their declaration in a new building's foundation.  This
practice had no analog in Persia, but Cyrus nevertheless found it useful to
appropriate in order to rule Babylon.  In his declaration, written on a
cylinder now called the Cyrus Cylinder, he states that the previous Babylonian
king, Nabonidus, had been unfaithful to Marduk, and that Marduk had smiled upon
Cyrus, and used Cyrus to smite the unfaithful Babylonian king.  Quote:

> Nabonidus brought the daily offerings to a halt; he interfered with the rites
instituted within the sanctuaries.  In his mind, reverential fear of Marduk,
king of the gods, came to an end.  He did yet more evil to the city every day.
He brought ruin on them all by a yoke without relief.  Enlil-of-the-gods became
extremely angry at their complaints.  Exalted Marduk, Enlil-of-the-gods,
relented.  He changed his mind about all the settlements whose sanctuaries were
in ruins, and the population of the land of Sumer and Akkad who had become like
corpses, and took pity on them.  He inspected and checked all the countries,
seeking for the upright king of his choice.  He took the hand of Cyrus, king of
the city of Anshan, and called him by his name, proclaiming him aloud for the
kingship over all of everything.

Now Cyrus, of course, as a Persian, did not care in the least what the
Babylonian god Marduk thought of him or Nabonidus for that matter.  But Marduk
could be invoked as a useful bit of propaganda to establish the legitimacy of
his rule in the eyes of the Babylonians.

Well, nothing in this world is permanent, and the Persian empire was no
exception.  But Babylon was never to regain its independence after Cyrus's
conquest.  Babylon remained under Persian control for another two hundred years
until 331 BC, when Alexander the Great swept in and exiled many of the
residents of the city.  Babylon as a city never really recovered from this
exile.  After Alexander's death, control fell to one of his generals, and
shortly thereafter the city was recaptured by the Persians, who held it for
nearly a millennium until the development of Islam in the mid-seventh century
AD.  Babylon then fell into the rapidly expanding Muslim Empire, but by this
point had essentially ceased to exist as a city.  About a century after the
foundation of Islam, the nearby city of Baghdad was founded and eventually
grew to encompass the ruins of the ancient city of Babylon.

So that in a nutshell is a political history of the city of Babylon.  I spent
some time dwelling it and the rise of the Neo-Babylonian empire and its fall to
King Cyrus the Great because it seems to be a symbolically and perhaps causally
significant period in the history of astronomy.  One important development in
astronomy shortly after the Persian conquest was the discovery of the Metonic
cycle.  As we discussed in earlier episodes, perhaps ad nauseam, one of the
principal issues of astronomy was determining when an extra month should be
added to the year since the length of a month does not neatly divide the length
of a year.  Up until this point, the addition of extra months was fairly ad
hoc.  Priests added the extra month whenever it became apparent that an extra
month was needed.  We see from civil records that during the reign of King
Cyrus Babylonian astronomers continued to insert extra months with no
discernible pattern.  But about ten years later, during the reign of his
successor, King Cambyses II, the Babylonian astronomers had begun a regular
eight year cycle.  The extra month would be added on the years three, six, and
eight.  This worked for a little while, but the length of this cycle in lunar
periods is still noticeably off from eight years, by about one and a half days.
So after three of these eight year cycles the astronomers had evidently noticed
that they were drifting too far from the solar calendar, and had to break the
cycle and add an extra extra month.  Now, the error across three of these
eight-year cycles was still only 4 and a half days.  That is, the date of, for
example, the spring equinox, had drifted by only four and a half days according
to the lunar calendar.  So it is actually something of an achievement that the
astronomy of the Babylonians was sophisticated enough that they could detect a
relatively small error like that early on and correct it.  But they didn't stop
with yet another ad hoc correction.  Within another cycle or two, by about 480
BC, Babylonian astronomers had refined their method of intercalation and
discovered the 19 year Metonic cycle.  This puts the extra months on the third,
sixth, eighth, eleventh, fourteenth, seventeenth, and nineteenth year.  The
Metonic cycle is highly accurate and drifts by only six and a half minutes per
year.  Once the Babylonians had hit upon the Metonic cycle in the early fifth
century they never again needed to deviate from it for the next five hundred
years.  Within a generation or two of the Persian conquest, the seemingly
arbitrary and chaotic addition of months to the calendar at random intervals
that had so plagued Babylonian society became a thing of the past.

But the Metonic cycle is not the only way in which astronomy changes around the
time of the Persian conquest.  More broadly, it is around this time that the
Babylonian astronomical records become much more numerous, detailed, and
varied.  These records are of course interesting in their own right --- after
all in the centuries after the Persian conquest the Babylonians had developed
the most sophisticated mathematical astronomy the ancient world would see for
centuries.  But these records were also critical directly or indirectly for
astronomy for centuries, even millennia to come.  Later Greek astronomers such
as Ptolemy relied heavily on the detailed records kept by Babylonian
astronomers to develop their planetary models.  And in turn, as the parameters
of the planetary models became outdated, it later prompted the development of
updated records in the Middle Ages, first by Islamic astronomers in Spain and
later by Christian astronomers in Spain.  And it was these records that
Copernicus used to develop his heliocentric model of the Solar System.

So what exactly are these Babylonian astronomical records?  We've already
discussed some of the older records in earlier episodes.  There are some
fragmentary, incidental records --- inscriptions on monuments, references to
dates in civil contracts, etc.  But the earliest systematic set of astronomical
records is the Enuma Anu Enlil, which literally means, "When the gods Anu and
Enlil".  The Enuma Anu Enlil consists of 70 tablets written sometime between
1600 and 1000 BC, though some parts of it may date back to 2000 BC.  The Enuma
Anu Enlil is almost entirely a collection of some 7000 omens.  I read through
some of these omens in the last episode and you may have noticed their somewhat
formulaic character.  Each omen consists of a protasis followed by an apodosis.
The protasis is written in the past tense and describes the phenomenon.  For
example, "In Nisannu the sunrise looked sprinkled with blood and the light
was cool."  Then this is followed by the apodosis, which is written in the
future tense and provides the omen.  So to complete the previous omen,
"rebellion will not stop in the country, there will be devouring by Adad."

A second set of tablets of prime importance is the Mul.Apin.  This was much
shorter than the Enuma Anu Enlil --- only two tablets instead of 70 and would
appear to be more scientific to the modern eye.  The Mul.Apin was a sort of
astronomical treatise that summarized the astronomical knowledge of the time.
The Mul.Apin started by listing the locations of important stars and the dates
of their heliacal risings.  It drew connections between various stars noting
which stars would be overhead or setting when other stars were rising.  It
described the course of the Sun in the sky over the year, described how the
length of the day and night varied, and presented a method to compute which
years needed extra months.  And while the Mul.Apin was a more rigorously
scientific text by modern standards, it does, of course, include a collection
of omens as well.  One very clever development that first appears in the
Mul.Apin was the introduction of a sort of formal "astronomical year" which
lasted exactly 360 days.  This astronomical year of course had no real relation
to the actual year, but was simply a formal device to make calculations over
many years easier.  A problem that Babylonian astronomers faced, particularly
in the earlier centuries was that they were adding days to months and months to
years essentially at random.  If they wanted to compare observations across
decades it was a bit of a nightmare to use real dates since you'd have to keep
track of all the years that had an extra month or two randomly inserted.  The
360-day year was a way to avoid this mess.  You could do all your calculations
with this 360 day year and then at the end convert from the astronomical year
to the actual year.  Astronomers today do something similar with the Julian
day, or at least the observational astronomers do.  The Julian day is the
number of days since January 1, 4713 BC, a distant enough day in the past that
we can be assured that nothing of interest happened on that day.  You can then
do your calculations ignoring any edge cases like leap years or leap seconds.
If you are, for example, trying to predict the position of the planets, most
modern day astronomical software will do these calculations using Julian days.
Then afterwards it can take into account all the leap days and leap seconds to
convert to the real wall clock time.

It is worth noting that both the Enuma Anu Enlil and Mul.Apin were widely
circulated texts in ancient Mesopotamia.  Or at least were widely circulated by
the standards of the time.  There were multiple copies of these tablets ---
these were not one of a kind texts.  And Babylonian scribes were apparently
intimately familiar with them.  Even very late in the history of Babylon, the
scribes who computed sophisticated predictions of planetary positions called
themselves "scribes of the series Enuma Anu Enlil."  The earliest copy we have
of the Mul.Apin dates back to 687 BC based on a date in the inscription, but a
number of copies of the text appear in the archaeological record shortly
thereafter which suggests that the original composition was earlier.  In fact,
the Mul.Apin can even be used to date itself using the dates of heliacal
risings.  Remember, these are the days of the year when a star is first visible
in the morning after it had disappeared from the night sky.  Heliacal risings
aren't exactly constant.  They drift a small amount every year due to the
precession of the Earth's rotation.  This isn't very noticeable from one year
to the next, but over the centuries it adds up.  By comparing the listed dates
of heliacal risings in the Mul.Apin to their true dates over the centuries,
archaeoastronomers were able to date the original composition of the Mul.Apin
to around 1300 BC +/- 150 years.  Now, this is likely underestimating the true
errors somewhat because this technique unfortunately has to make a number of
assumptions.  These assumptions are all reasonable, but reasonable is not the
same thing as true.  For example, many of the stars in the list of heliacal
risings are actually small constellations.  Is the date of the heliacal rising
the date when the first star in the constellation is visible?  When the
brightest star in the constellation is visible?  When half the constellation is
visible?  When the whole constellation is visible?  Different assumptions here
give drastically different dates.  We are also assuming that the helical
risings recorded in the Mul.Apin are accurate.  We know from certain events
where we can compare Babylonian observations against precisely computed
configurations of the heavens that the Babylonians were not always the most
rigorous observers.  Perhaps they had fudged the heliacal risings to round the
numbers a little bit and this biased the data.  How would we know?  A slight
bias upwards or downwards could shift the calculated date by centuries.
Further since all the dates listed are with respect to this fictitious 360 day
year, how are we supposed to convert from the fictitious astronomical year to
the real year?  The Mul.Apin does not tell us so we have to make some
assumptions.  All we can say is that it seems likely that the Mul.Apin was
composed earlier than 687 BC, probably by several centuries.  But as with so
many other things in ancient history, that is about all we can say for sure.

The Enuma Anu Enlil and Mul.Apin are the two major astronomical texts written
prior to the Neo-Babylonian empire.  But after the rise of the Neo-Babylonian
empire the number of astronomical records grows tremendously.  During the
Neo-Babylonian and especially during the rule of Babylon by the Persian Empire
we see a huge increase in the number of documents of all kinds available ---
civil contracts, letters to the king from officials in far-flung lands, royal
proclamations and so on.  There are perhaps a few explanations of this.  Of
course, one reason is survivorship bias.  The later we get in history the more
likely something is to have survived.  But also the Neo-Babylonian and
especially the Persian empires were far larger than the kingdoms that had come
before them.  They needed to coordinate their activities over vast territories
and so needed to communicate in writing more frequently and in more detail.
Furthermore, as populations and civilizations grew, they became more complex
and could support more sophisticated kinds of civil interactions, which also
required more detailed civil contracts.

This held true of astronomical records as well.  One of the most important
kinds of records for the development of astronomy was the so-called
Astronomical Diaries.  It is believed that these records began around 750 BC
during the reign of King Nabonassar.  The reason for this assumption is that
much later, the great Greek astronomer Claudius Ptolemy chose the year 747 BC
as the starting date for his astronomical tables in The Almagest because, as he
writes, "for we have ancient observations completely preserved from that period
to the present."  But the oldest astronomical diary we today know of dates back
to 652 BC.  The early records are patchy, but by the Persian conquest, we end
up with a nearly unbroken string of records that lasts until 61 BC.  This
continuous chain of observations for six or seven centuries constitutes the
longest scientific research program in history.

Like the Enuma Anu Enlil, the astronomical diaries have a very regular kind of
structure.  Each record contains data from six or seven months, and each month
generally contains six observations or so.  Most of the observations concerned
the moon.  The entry would begin by noting whether or not the previous month
was full and had 30 days or empty and had 29 days.  This would establish the
start of the next month.  The astronomer would note how long it was between
sunset and moonset.  At the middle of the month, the astronomer would record a
number of similar intervals: the time from moonset to sunrise; the time from
moonrise to sunset; the time from sunrise to moonset; and the time from sunset
to moonrise.  This would help to establish whether or not this month would have
29 or 30 days.  And then at the end of the month the astronomer would note the
time from moonrise to sunrise.  Otherwise throughout the month the date and
position of the Moon would be recorded if it passed by one of the 30 reference
stars.

But in addition to the motions of the moon, the diaries would typically record
notable phenomena of the planets.  They would note which zodiacal sign the
planet was in, how far it was away from the nearest of the 30 reference stars
and in what direction the planet was relative to that star.  Moreover, there
were special points in a planet's orbit, like opposition, which we will talk
about in more detail in a moment, whose date would be recorded.  The diaries also
contained other information that was of note to the astronomer which we would
not consider to be astronomical today such as unusual weather or even prices of
commodities like barley, dates, sesame, and wool.  In fact sometimes the
commodity data was quite detailed and prices would be given for various days of
the month or even different times of the same day.

The astronomical diaries are really quite a remarkable series of documents.  It
is impressive for a civilization to have meticulously maintained these series
of records for some seven centuries.  And these records required a great deal
of training to produce.  Of course it would have taken a good deal of training
to learn how to produce these observations.  But more than that, the
astronomical measurements themselves were written with cuneiform in the
Akkadian language.  By the time of the Neo-Babylonian Empire in the 600s BC,
Akkadian had largely fallen out of use as a spoken language in Mesopotamia in
favor of Aramaic.  The use of Akkadian was confined to priests and scribes for
formal, written documents, similar to the use of Latin in medieval Europe.  And
just as it was no small feat for the Catholic Church to train a body of
scholars to write in the dead tongue of Latin, it must have been no small feat
for the city of Babylon to train its astronomers to keep regular observations
and record them in the dead tongue of Akkadian.  But nevertheless this feat was
accomplished, all the way up to the first century BC.  And in fact some
cuneiform records of other kinds continue to be produced throughout the first
century AD, with the last one we have dating from 75 AD.  Why did the
Babylonians support this endeavor for so long?  This seems to be a bit of a
mystery.  After the conquest of King Cyrus, they didn't have a king to provide
omens for.  Maybe they were doing it in case a Mesopotamian king came to throw
off the yoke of foreign domination.  And, of course, astronomical recordkeeping
was likely a component of a broader set of religious ritual.  Some of the
tablets we have warn that the information contained therein is a secret kind of
knowledge.  But this is all a bit speculative on my part and there doesn't seem
to be any definite explanation for why the Babylonians maintained such detailed
astronomical observations for such a long period of time.

Well, as I mentioned earlier, the Babylonians generally didn't record the
position of the planets in general.  They only recorded planetary positions at
certain special points in a planet's orbit.  This actually was an issue for
later astronomers because although the Babylonian records continuously spanned
a long time, they were fairly sparse in terms of the general planetary motion
since they tended to only record planetary positions at special times.  These
special positions that the Babylonians recorded have variously been called
planetary phases or stations.  Claudius Ptolemy even complained about the
Babylonians only recording positions at the planetary stations in the Almagest
saying, 

> Most of the old observations were thrown together carelessly and grossly.
> The more continuous of them contain stations and ... the stations cannot 
> indicate the exact time, since the planet's local motion remains
> imperceptible for many days before and after its station; and the apparitions
> not only make the places immediately disappear along with the stars as they
> are seen for the first or last time, but also can be utterly misleading as to
> the times because of the differences in the atmosphere and in the eye of the
> observer.

Now, as Ptolemy concedes, this was only true of the older Babylonian
observations.  The later diaries, starting during the fifth century BC, start
to record more detail about planetary motion, in particular when the planet
entered a new constellation of the zodiac.  And here we see something very
interesting, because if we work out where these planets were on the dates of
the recording, we find that these transitions from one constellation to the
next are all 30 degrees apart.  Even though the size of the actual pattern of
stars on the sky that made up each zodiacal constellation varied, for the
purposes of recording astronomical observation, the ecliptic was divided into
12 equal regions of 30 degrees apiece, which we today call the signs of the
zodiac.  Earlier observations of the constellation a planet was in were
complicated by the fact that the constellations were of irregular extents and
did not have clearly defined boundaries.  There may have even been regions of
the sky that didn't have any constellations at all!  So this development of
zodiacal signs in the fifth century BC greatly simplified the recording of
planetary positions.

Nevertheless, although this allowed the planetary positions to be recorded at
more frequent intervals, records of the planetary stations were really of
primary importance because they formed the longest chain of observations.  So
what are the planetary stations?  Well they are different for the superior
planets and the inferior planets.  The superior planets are those planets in
our modern model which have orbits outside that of the Earth, so Mars, Jupiter,
and Saturn, and the inferior planets are those which have orbits inside that of
Earth, so Mercury and Venus.  Let's look at the stations of a superior planet
first.  The first station that the Babylonians had is easy enough: it is the
first appearance.  After the planet has been behind the Sun for some time, this
would be the point at which the planet is once again visible in the morning sky
just before sunrise, much like a heliacal rising of a star.

The next phase deals with a phenomenon that is of paramount importance to the
history of astronomy, namely retrograde motion.  Now, most of the time, a
superior planet will slowly drift eastwards in the sky relative to the
background stars.  The reason for this is that the planet is revolving around
the Sun, and this motion causes its position in the sky to change relative to
the background stars.  Easy enough.  The catch here is that when we observe the
planet we are ourselves moving as well.  Now, most of the time, the motion of
the Earth is in some other direction relative to the planet, so we still
observe its usual eastward drift.  The exception comes around the time that the
Earth is between the Sun and the planet.  Because the Earth revolves around the
Sun faster than any of the superior planets, around this time, the Earth ends
up overtaking the planet and passing it by.  This causes the planet to appear
to move backwards on the sky from our vantage point, just as a slower car on
the highway appears to move backwards as you overtake it in a faster car.  So
occasionally the general eastward drift of a superior planet is interrupted and
it starts to drift westward on the sky for a time before slowing down,
stopping, and resuming its usual eastward drift.  This period of westward
motion is what is called retrograde motion, and explaining this phenomenon was
really the principal problem in astronomy for about two thousand years.

Well, the Babylonians had no explanation whatsoever for this phenomenon, but
they did notice it that it happened.  In their astronomical diaries, one of the
planetary stations they made note of was what is called the first stationary
point, where the planet stops its eastward drift and starts moving westward.
Then they noted opposition, which is the point at which the planet is on the
opposite side of the sky from the Sun.  Then the fourth station was the second
stationary point, where retrograde motion ceased, and the planet began moving
eastward once more.  Finally the last station they noted was the last night
that the planet was visible before it disappeared behind the Sun.

The stations of the inferior planets are somewhat similar in nature.  But the
inferior planets differ from the superior planets in that their motion is
limited and they cannot wander too far away from the Sun.  Venus can only ever
be seen at most 47 degrees away from the Sun, and Mercury only 28 degrees away.
The first station is the opposite from that of the superior planets.  Rather
than appearing in the morning sky, the planet first appears in the evening sky.
It then drifts eastward relative to the background sky for some time before
hitting its first stationary point, where it stops its eastward drift and then
starts to move westward relative to the background stars.  At this point the
planet starts its period of retrograde motion.  But unlike the case of a
superior planet, an inferior planet continues its retrograde motion right past
the Sun.  So it disappears from the evening sky for a time and later on
reappears in the morning sky just before sunrise.  Then it continues its
westward drift before it stops, turns around and starts to drift in the usual
eastward direction.  Then it eventually catches up to the Sun and disappears,
starting the cycle once more.  So the Babylonians recorded six stations for the
inferior planet: first appearance in the evening, the first stationary point in
the evening, disappearance from the evening sky, the first appearance in the
morning sky, the stationary point in the morning, and the disappearance from
the morning sky.

I went into a fair amount of detail about the planetary stations because they
are important for understanding the last class of astronomical records which we
will discuss.  We could broadly call these mathematical astronomy tablets.
These themselves came in a number of different types.  The simplest of these
are what are known as the "Goal Year texts."  The goal year texts were a very
simple way of producing what are called ephemerides, or predictions of
planetary positions.  Now, thanks to their meticulous recordkeeping, Babylonian
astronomers began to notice patterns in the positions of the planets.  And one
of the fortunate things about the planetary motions is that while they can seem
somewhat arbitrary month to month --- seemingly at random the planet will stop
its usual motion and turn around and go backwards --- over decades the behavior
is almost completely periodic.  The Babylonian astronomers may have noticed
that, for example, one month Saturn was at opposition in the constellation of
Leo and wondered when and where Saturn would arrive at the next station, the
second stationary point.  If they went back to their records, they would have
found that the last time Saturn was at opposition in the constellation of Leo
was 59 years prior.  Then by consulting their records they would have found
that Saturn had reached its secondary point about two months and one week
later, about six degrees away from where it was at opposition.  Well if they
waited another two months and one week, they would have observed history repeat
itself --- Saturn would arrive at its second stationary point about six degrees
away from opposition, just as it had 59 years ago.

And there were similar periodicities for the other planets in the sky.  Mars
would repeat its behavior every 47 and 79 years, Jupiter every 71 and 83 years,
Venus every 8 years, and Mercury every 46 years.  The premise of a Goal Year
text was simple then.  If you wanted to compile a table of predictions of
planetary positions, all you would have to do is go back and copy the records
from 59 years ago for Saturn, 71 years ago for Jupiter, 47 years ago for Mars,
etc.  Then you would have a more or less accurate prediction of the positions
for the year to come.

Now we have evidence from other records that this technique was in use around
the Persian invasion, but despite its simplicity, goal year texts do not
actually appear as a distinct form of record until around 300 BC.  Well where
do these numbers like the 59 year periodicity of Saturn come from?  While the
Babylonians did not have a physical model to explain their origin, they did
seem to have a model of planetary motion that was somewhat more sophisticated
than just copying earlier records because occasionally they do make small
adjustments in their goal year texts.

To understand this we need to understand two different kinds of periodicities
in planetary motions.  The first period, called the sidereal period, is what we
normally think of when we talk about the orbital period of a planet.  In our
modern heliocentric model of the Solar System, the sidereal period is simply
the time it takes the planet to make one revolution around the Sun.  From a
geocentric perspective, that is from our perspective looking at the planet here
on Earth, the sidereal period is the time it takes the planet to return to the
same background star on the sky.  For Saturn the sidereal period is slightly
less than 29 and a half years.  There is another important kind of period
however, called the synodic period.  This is the time it takes the planet to
return to the same configuration relative to the Earth and the Sun.  So, for
example, if the Earth is between the Sun and Saturn, this is the time it takes
for the Earth to come between the Sun and Saturn once again, or, in other
words, the time from one opposition to the next.  In the case of Saturn the
synodic period is about one year and two weeks.  Now, as you might expect, the
sidereal period gets bigger, the more distant the planet is.  But, perhaps
counterintuitively, the synodic period actually *decreases* for the more
distant planets.  In the limit that a planet is infinitely far away, well, it's
just like a background star, and its synodic period is exactly one year.  For
the synodic period, the closer the planet is to Earth is the determining
factor.  The reason for this is that what is important for the synodic period
is the relative velocity between the Earth and the other planet.  For the
planets closer to Earth, they are actually moving closer to the Earth's speed,
so their relative motion compared to the Earth is quite slow.  As a consequence,
Mars has quite a leisurely synodic period of nearly two years and one month,
the longest synodic period of all the planets in the Solar System.

Well, if you are interested not only in whether or not an opposition has
occurred, but also *where* it has occurred, you need to take into account both
the sidereal and the synodic period.  Because it's not enough to use the
synodic period to figure out when, for example the next opposition will be,
because the next opposition won't necessarily be in the same zodiacal sign.
The planet will return to the same zodiacal sign after a sidereal period.  So
in essence, you have these two periods, the synodic and sidereal periods, and
you need to find something like the least common multiple of these two periods.
Well you can't really do this exactly because the periods aren't integers.  But
you need to find the smallest number of synodic and sidereal periods that makes
approximately an integer.

This is easiest to see with Saturn.  So the sidereal period of Saturn is about
29 and a half years and the synodic period is about one year and two weeks.
So, if you wait a single sidereal period that will have been about 28 and a
half synodic periods.  No good.  Saturn will be in the same spot in the sky
relative to the background stars, it will, say, be back in Leo, but because of
that extra one half a synodic period it will be at conjunction instead of
opposition.  So the Sun will be in Leo, too, rather than on the opposite side
of the sky!  But if you now wait two sidereal periods, that will have been
about 59 years and about 57 synodic periods.  56.91 synodic periods, to be
exact.  But close enough for Babylonian astronomy.  And that will put Saturn
back at opposition.

And you can follow the same procedure to figure out what these periodicities
are for the other planets in the sky.  Because the periods aren't exact
multiples of each other, there are multiple long-term periodicities that you
can find.  This is why the Babylonians sometimes used periods of 71 years for
Jupiter and other times 83 years.  Both are approximately integer ratios
between the synodic and sidereal periods of Jupiter.  Furthermore, because
these ratios aren't exact integers, over time errors accumulate.  This meant
that the goal year texts had to be updated based on the most recent
series of observations rather than just copying the same phenomena centuries
out into the future.

Well, the Goal Year texts were a pretty straightforward technique in the
Babylonian mathematical astronomy tablets.  In fact it might be a bit of a
stretch to even call it mathematical astronomy.  But the Babylonians also
produced a series of much more sophisticated astronomical calculations.
However, as much as I would like to discuss them with you now, our discussion
of the Babylonian tablets in this episode is getting a bit lengthy, and the
more complicated tablets will require some time to explain, so these texts will
have to wait for our next episode.  Then we will dive into how the Babylonians
produced their most accurate planetary and lunar ephemerides, a pair of
techniques known as System A and System B.  I hope you will join me then.
Thank you for listening, and until the next full moon, clear skies.
