---
layout: episode
number: 7
title: Greek Tales of Ancient Nights & Days
date: 2021-7-24
description: |
    As we start to examine the astronomy of Ancient Greece we hear of the myth
    cycles of Theseus and Perseus, episodes from both of which appear in the
    night sky. These myth cycles help us to understand the conception the
    ancient Greeks had to the civilizations that came before them, the Minoans
    and the Mycenaeans and prepare us for the early cosmology of ancient
    Greece.
categories: episodes
---

## Transcript

Good evening and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon.  My
name is Joe Antognini.  Well in the last five episodes our focus has been on
the astronomy of the Babylonians and we've followed its development from the
earliest inscriptions we have around 2000 BC up until its pinnacle in the last
few centuries BC when it was under the rule of the Persians and the
Macedonians.  There is still quite a bit that I've had to leave out about the
Babylonians in the interest of time, and here and there I'll briefly make
mention of other aspects of their astronomy that I left out because, by virtue
of having the most sophisticated astronomy of the ancient world, they had a
strong influence on the astronomy of nearby cultures, particularly the Greeks.
But if this series ever has a hope of getting to the present day as the tagline
promises, we need to move along.

So, now our attention turns to the civilization that built upon the astronomy
of the Babylonians and ultimately developed a cosmological model which would
hold sway in the West for some fifteen centuries --- the Greeks.

Now, in order to understand the development and unique characteristics of Greek
astronomy we are going to have to back up in time a little bit.  When we
finished with the Babylonians we had made it to the last few centuries BC.
After the death of Alexander the Great, Babylon was squabbled over by
Alexander's generals in what have come to be called the Wars of the Diadochi,
diadochi roughly meaning successor.  These wars were hard on the citizens of
Babylon and many of them left the city.  Finally, in 275, one of the diadochi
named Seleucus forced the residents of Babylon to move to his newly constructed
capital city some 40 miles north, which he modestly named Seleucia.  But a
remnant of priests remained at the Babylonian temple because astronomical
records continue for some time, with the last record we have dating to around
100 AD.

We will one day return to these events from the Greek perspective, but by 300
BC quite a lot has already happened over in Greece, so now we need to back up
quite a few centuries.

Now you may recall from Episode 4 that one of the defining events in the
history of the ancient world was the Late Bronze Age Collapse during the 12th
century BC.  All across the region, from the eastern Mediterranean to North
Africa, to the Levant and Near East, civilizations suddenly collapsed over the
course of just a few decades.  The Kassite Empire in Babylonia collapsed, along
with the Hittite Empire in Anatolia, or modern day Turkey, and the Amorite
states in the Levant.  The kingdom of Egypt survived the collapse, but was
drastically weakened, both in terms of territory controlled and overall
economic power.  And the late bronze age collapse did not spare the region we
are now going to turn our attention to, where modern day Greece resides.
During the Bronze Age, this part of the world hosted two notable civilizations,
the Minoans and the Mycenaeans.

The Minoans were the older of the two and built a vibrant kingdom that emerged
very early on the island of Crete around 3000 BC and developed for some 15
centuries before beginning a gradual decline around the 16th century BC and
then suddenly disappearing during the Late Bronze Age Collapse around 1100 BC.
Later in the series we may talk about the astronomy of the Minoans, but for now
the relevance of the Minoans to our story of the Greeks is that they built
their civilization on land that the Greeks later occupied and this civilization
persisted in the cultural memories of the Greeks through their mythical
founder, King Minos.

According to the myth, King Minos had a son named Androgeus who regularly
competed in the Olympic Games every four years.  Androgeus was a skilled
athlete and excelled in the games.  At the time, Aegeus was the king of Athens
and had a brother named Pallas, who was apparently an extraordinarily
prodigious man and had fifty sons, collectively called the Pallantides.

Now, as we'll see throughout our discussion of ancient Greece, there is no
canonical form of the Greek myths in the same way that there is, for example, a
canonical telling of the stories of the Hebrew Bible.  In the Greek myths
details or even major plot points can vary widely between different authors.
In one telling of the story, the Pallantides became jealous of Androgeus's
athletic prowess and assassinated him.  In another version of the story, they
became good friends with Androgeus, which made King Aegeus nervous.  King
Aegeus feared that Pallas might use his sons' friendship with Androgeus to
conspire with King Minos to assassinate him and usurp the throne, and so King
Aegeus preemptively killed Androgeus.

Whatever the details, Androgeus winds up murdered in Athens and King Minos is
understandably upset.  He sends the entire Cretan fleet to Athens to demand
satisfaction from King Aegeus.  King Aegeus either does not know who the
assassin was or, perhaps, was himself responsible for the murder and so he puts
the entire city of Athens at the mercy of King Minos.  King Minos then exacts
a terrible tribute from Athens.  Every seven years the city would have to send
the seven most courageous young men and the seven most beautiful maidens in the
city to Knossos, the capital city of Crete, where they would be thrown into a
terrifying structure called the labyrinth.

Now, apologies if this story is about as winding as the labyrinth itself, but
Greek myths are a fairly intricately constructed web which makes it hard to
tell one story in isolation of all the others.  At any rate, Minos and his two
brothers, Sarpedon and Rhadamanthus, were all demi-gods, sons of the god Zeus
and the mortal Phoenician princess Europa.  And many years prior, before Minos
had ascended the throne, he and his two brothers had been adopted as
stepchildren of King Astorion, the second king of Crete, whose father had been
the first king to sail to the island.  After the death of King Astorion, the
three brothers fought amongst themselves for the right to rule the island.
Minos was victorious and banished his brothers.  Sarpedon fled to Asia Minor in
a region called Lycia where he founded a city called Miletus, which as we will
see, later became an important city for astronomy.  Incidentally, in some
tellings, Miletus was a fair boy whom Minos and Sarpedon both fell in love with
and was the origin of the quarrel between the two brothers after Miletus chose
Sarpedon over Minos.  The other brother, Rhadamanthus, ended up in Boeotia in
central Greece, but also apparently was associated with the other islands of
the Aegean.

All this is to say that King Minos had won the throne, but did not feel
especially secure in his right to rule.  So he prayed to Poseidon, the god of
the sea, to send him a sign.  And Poseidon answered his prayers and sent him a
snow white bull, known today as the Cretan Bull.  Now, something to know about
relations between gods and mortals was that they were heavily dependent on
sacrifice.  When Poseidon sent King Minos the snow white bull, he expected King
Minos to sacrifice the bull to him as a gesture of gratitude for the divine
favor.  But the bull was so beautiful that King Minos was loathe to give it up
so he sacrificed an ordinary bull instead.  This ingratitude enraged Poseidon,
who then enlisted Aphrodite, the goddess of love, to cause King Minos's wife,
Queen Pasiphaë, to fall madly in love with the bull.  In order to consummate
her love, she ordered Daedalus, the finest craftsman in the land, to construct
a hollow wooden cow that she could occupy.  Daedalus then covered the wooden
cow in a real cow hide so as to attract the Cretan bull.  Queen Pasiphaë then,
shall we say, came to know the bull in the Biblical sense, and gave birth to a
half-man, half-bull creature which she named Astorion II, after its
grandfather, but it became more commonly known as the Minotaur.

King Minos was, naturally, horrified by this development and so he ordered
Daedalus to construct an intricate prison called the Labyrinth in which the
passageways twisted and turned, opening one upon the other, so that even the
wiliest of prisoners could not find an exit.  The maze was so subtle that after
constructing it, Daedalus himself was hardly able to escape his own creation.
King Minos then imprisoned the Minotaur in the center of the Labyrinth where it
would find and devour any unfortunate prisoners who were thrown in the
Labyrinth with it.

Now, if I can briefly pause in the mythical narrative and turn back to the
actual Minoans, the most impressive cultural artifacts that they produced were
five extraordinary palaces across the island of Crete.  By far the largest of
these palaces is in the capital city of Knossos and was discovered by the
archaeologist Arthur Evans in the year 1900.  This palace is an enormous
complex containing more than 1000 rooms, all connecting to one other in a
complicated layout.  Minoan artists also covered many of the walls in beautiful
frescoes, a substantial fraction of which depict bulls, which apparently had
special religious significance for the Minoans.  On this basis Arthur Evans
speculated that the palace of Knossos may have been the source of the ancient
Greek myth of the labyrinth.  Of course, in archaeology, as in astronomy, it is
often difficult to find conclusive evidence and so there are other candidates
for the historical source of the Labyrinth.  In particular, there is a complex
of caves near the city of Gortyn in the southern part of Crete which were
expanded by humans.  Or it is entirely possible that the mythical Labyrinth had
no historical counterpart at all and was invented out of whole cloth by the
ancient Greeks.  One other note here, while we're talking about the actual
Minoans, is that the Kingdom of Minoa was not the name they had for themselves.
The name Minoa was actually bestowed on them by Arthur Evans himself who
speculated on the connection between the ancient civilization and the Greek
myth of King Minos.

Well, to return to the mythic narrative, recall that many years later, after
the death of his son Androgeus, King Minos had extracted a tribute of seven
young men and seven young women from Athens.  Every seven years Athens sent
their most courageous young men and their fairest maidens to Crete where King
Minos threw them into the Labyrinth to be devoured by the Minotaur.

And so things had proceeded for many years and during all this time, King
Aegeus, the king of Athens, had had no children.  Naturally he wanted an heir,
so he did what all great Greek heroes did when they came at a crossroads in
life --- he went to visit the Oracle of Delphi.  Then the Oracle of Delphi did
what she did best --- she provided a cryptic reply that invariably the hearer
would not understand until it was too late and had come to pass.  In this case,
the Oracle told King Aegeus, "Loosen not the bulging neck of the wineskin great
chief of the people, until you have reached the height of Athens, lest you die
of grief."

King Aegeus could not understand the meaning of the prophecy and on his journey
home stopped at the palace of King Pittheus in Troezen who was renowned for
his erudition and wisdom.  During dinner, King Aegeus recounted the prophecy to
King Pittheus who immediately understood its meaning.  But King Pittheus did
not tell King Aegeus.  Instead, over the course of the dinner, Pittheus plied
Aegeus with unmixed wine.

As a slight digression here, in ancient Greece wine was consumed copiously, but
the Greeks almost exclusively diluted their wine with water, or sometimes snow
for cold drinks.  Drinking wine at full strength as we do today was seen has
barbaric and potentially deadly.  The Greek chronicler Pausanius tells in the
second century AD in his book Description of Greece, that the Gallic chieftain
Brennus had committed suicide by drinking undiluted wine.  And Herodotus 
writes that the Spartan king Cleomenes I had adopted the practice of drinking
wine undiluted from the barbaric Scythians and was subsequently driven insane.
So when we see that Pittheus plied Aegeus with unmixed wine we are meant to
understand that Aegeus was made well, truly, and hopelessly sloshed.

King Pittheus then made his daughter Aethra sleep with the drunken King Aegeus.
Later that night, as she was sleeping Athena, the goddess of wisdom, came to
Aethra in a dream and instructed Aethra to waken, and quickly go to the
neighboring island of Sphaeria.  (Incidentally, this detail comes to us from
the same Pausanius who warned us about the deadly effects of drinking unmixed
wine in his Description of Greece.)  In Sphaeria she was to pour out a libation
to summon Poseidon and lay with him as well.  The resulting child, named
Theseus, was thus the son of both Poseidon and Aegeus and, like the hero
Herecles, was demigod --- half human and half divine.

After King Aegeus woke up the next day, undoubtedly with a terrific hangover,
he learned what he had done and it was not long before he discovered that
Aethra was pregnant.  King Aegeus needed to return to his kingdom, so he
removed his sandals and sword and placed an enormous boulder on top of them.
He then told Aethra that his son would be ready to come to his kingdom when he
could remove the boulder and retrieve the items.

Well sixteen years passed and Theseus grew in strength until one day he was
able to move the rock and claim his father's sandals and sword.  Theseus then
set out to meet his father in the kingdom of Athens.  Theseus had the option of
traveling to Athens by boat or over land, and being a young, scrappy hero in
search of adventure and glory, he decides that the passage by land will be the
more dangerous of the two journeys and opts for that.  And indeed, in his
travels along the bandit-infested roads he encounters six monsters, known as
the Six Labors of Theseus.  The first and last were the most well known.
Theseus's first labor was his encounter with the giant Periphetes, who wielded
and enormous iron club.  After Theseus defeats Periphetes he takes the club for
himself and is often depicted holding it in art.

In his sixth and final labor he encounters Procrustes who had a home in which
he would invite weary travelers to rest.  When he put them in his bed he would
ensure that they fit exactly.  If they were too tall, he would amputate the
excess length from their body, and if they were too short he would stretch them
out until they were precisely long enough.  When Theseus passed by, Procrustes
made the fatal mistake of attempting to play the same trick on the hero.
Theseus then turned the trick around on Procrustes and chopped off his legs and
head so that he would fit his own bed.  The myth of Procrustes gives us today
the term Procrustean or a Procrustean bed, which is an arbitrary standard which
must be adhered to no matter how absurd the consequences.

Well after his six labors Theseus arrived at long last in Athens.  Now, the
ancient world was in general what we might today call a low trust environment.
If an armed stranger arrived in town it was oftentimes wise to be somewhat
wary.  And likewise for the stranger, when arriving in an unknown town it was
best to be somewhat on guard.  So Theseus kept his identity secret for a time
when he arrived.

In the meantime King Aegeus had married a woman named Medea.  Well, woman is
perhaps not quite right because her grandfather was Helios, the Sun god.  So
she was partially divine.  Medea plays an important role in the story of the
Golden Fleece with Jason and the Argonauts.  This is quite a detailed story
which would take us too far astray, but during the quest for the Golden Fleece,
Medea had done some very bad things, including murdering her brother, chopping
him up into pieces, and scattering his body parts across an island so as to
prevent her father from capturing Jason.  But after the adventures of the
Golden Fleece, Medea and Jason had settled down in Corinth and gotten married
and she bore him anywhere between one and fourteen children depending on the
version.  But after 10 years of marriage Jason abandoned Medea and his children
to marry the princess Creusa, daughter of King Creon.  Shakespeare writes that
hell hath no fury like a woman scorned, and Medea is certainly not the sort of
woman you want to scorn.  As the myth is told in Euripedes's tragedy Medea,
Medea then sends Creusa a dress covered in poison which kills her, and then her
father, King Creon, when he tries to save her.  Medea then murdered her
children and fled Corinth on a flying chariot given to her by her grandfather
Helios.

Medea went through some adventures on her flight from Corinth, but ultimately
she ended up in Athens where she met and married King Aegeus.  So this is our
hero Theseus's stepmother.  Upon Theseus's arrival into Athens Medea
immediately recognizes him as Aegeus's son.  Well Medea had also borne King
Aegeus a son named Medes and she wanted Medes to inherit the Athenian throne.
Medea convinced King Aegeus that the stranger Theseus was a threat and should
be disposed of.  And as always, Medea had a plan for how to do this.

If you recall the snow-white bull that Poseidon had given King Minos as a sign
that he was the rightful ruler of Crete, with which his wife Pasiphaë had
fallen in love with and ended up with the birth of the Minotaur and the
construction of the Labyrinth, well this same bull had gone on a rampage across
Crete, destroying whatever it came across.  One of the 12 labors of the hero
Heracles, who has quite an involved story of his own, was to capture the Cretan
Bull, which Heracles duly did and then transported out of Crete and onto
mainland Greece.  From there the bull wandered into the town of Marathon and
became known locally as the Marathonian bull.  The bull was wreaking havoc at
this point and so Medea proposed to King Aegeus that Theseus be sent on what
she believed to be a suicide mission to capture the bull.  Well, Theseus
happily accepts the challenge, has more adventures along the way, but
ultimately kills the bull and drags it all the way back to Athens where King
Aegeus cooks the bull and holds a ceremonial banquet.

Medea was probably frustrated by Theseus's success, but she decided to do what
she knew best --- poison him.  If you want something done right, sometimes
you just have to do it yourself.  At the banquet she handed Theseus a poisoned
cup, but as Theseus reached out to grab it, King Aegeus spied the sword he had
left under the rock in Troezen and realized that the stranger was his own son.
He jumped up and knocked the cup out of Theseus's hand and embraced him.
Medea was then forced to flee yet again and has further adventures in
which, as you might expect, she murders more of her own family members.

So we now have the young hero Theseus in Athens, where, if you recall to the
beginning of this story, the city is forced to pay the tribute to King Minos of
seven young men and seven young women every seven years.  When King Minos
demands his tribute next, Theseus volunteers to go and kill the Minotaur.  Well
King Aegeus isn't very thrilled about this plan, but in the end, this is a
mythical story after all and he can't keep the hero from embarking on his
adventures.  Theseus and the other 13 victims sail off for Crete in a ship with
black sails.  Before leaving, Theseus agrees with his father that when he
returns he will fly white sails on the ship if all has gone well, but if he
should die, the crew will fly black sails instead.

Naturally, as sacrificial victims, Theseus and the thirteen others could not
bring any weapons with them on the journey.  But on their arrival they had the
honor of being greeted by King Minos and Theseus told him that he was a son of
Poseidon.  To test Theseus's boast, King Minos took off a golden ring, tossed
it into the ocean, and asked Theseus to retrieve it.  Theseus dove in and a
short while later return with not only the ring but also a crown that
Amphitrite, the wife of Poseidon and queen of the sea had given to him while he
was underwater.  Theseus then presented the crown to King Minos's daughter
Ariadne who was present and watching the spectacle.  Ariadne immediately fell
in love with Theseus.

Secretly, before Theseus and his compatriots were thrust into the Labyrinth,
she slipped to him a small sword and a ball of thread that he could use to
retrace his steps through the Labyrinth.  That was all the help Theseus needed
and with his sword and the thread of Ariadne, he slew the Minotaur and was able
to escape triumphant.  Then he and Ariadne escaped Crete to elope, along with
Ariadne's sister and the 13 other Athenian victims.  On the way back to Athens
they stopped on the island of Naxos to rest.  But there, Theseus abandons his
new lover  while she is still sleeping and sails away from Naxos without her.
Different versions of the story give Theseus different motivations for
abandoning Ariadne.  Some of them say that he could not trust her because she
betrayed her father and others say that he learned that she was already married
to Dionysus, the god of wine.  Since Theseus was as mythic hero of Athens,
Athenian versions of the story say that he was visited by Athena in his sleep,
who told him that he had to leave her as she was destined to be the wife of
Dionysus.  Whatever the reason, after she is abandoned she is inconsolate
until Dionysus arrives whereupon she falls in love with him and marries him.
In celebration of their marriage Dionysus takes her crown and puts in the
heavens where it became the constellation Corona Borealis, or the northern
crown.  In other versions of the story the crown was originally Dionysus's and
was either given to Ariadne drunkenly before she met Theseus, or given to her
as a wedding gift after he marries her.  At any rate, there you have the
somewhat tenuous connection of this long tale to astronomy.  But we have come
so far that I would be remiss if I did not spend a little longer concluding the
tale.

Upon his triumphant return, Theseus, either so happy to be back, or upset
that he had to abandon Ariadne, depending on the version, forgets to change the
sails of the ship from black to white.  His father, King Aegeus, seeing the
black sails approach believes that Theseus is dead and throws himself off a
cliff into the sea, which is why the sea is called the Aegean Sea.

Theseus's defeat of the Minotaur was a tremendous victory for Athens.  To
celebrate Theseus's deeds and thank the gods, every year thereafter they sailed
the same ship to the sacred island of Delos for a religious ritual.  Over the
centuries, various parts of the ship rotted away and when they did the
Athenians replaced them with fresh parts.  Eventually, every part of the ship
had been replaced.  This story gave rise to the philosophical problem known as
the Ship of Theseus and the problem is this.  If you replace a single part of a
ship, say a single board on the deck, can you call it the same ship?  Intuition
would say yes.  But now, over time, you replace one part every year until
centuries later, every part has been replaced.  Is it now the same ship?  If we
accept that changing a single part does not produce a different ship.  It would
seem that replacing any individual part of the ship would not fundamentally
change the sameness of the ship.  But in the end you are left with a ship with
entirely different parts.  Now you have a dilemma.  If you believe that the
ship is somehow different, you are forced to identify a certain moment when the
ship had changed, despite the fact that each change was essentially
infinitesimally small.  On the other hand, suppose you believe that it is still
the same ship, despite the different parts.  Now what would happen, as Thomas
Hobbes asked many centuries later, if you go and reconstruct the ship using the
original parts that you have removed.  Which of the two is the original ship?  

This question may seem to be nothing more than a game of semantics, but the
philosophical issues at play are actually deeper than you might think because
the same problem is at hand in what is known in philosophy as the problem of
the self.  We all, of course, have some self-identity, and this self identity
is *not* a matter of semantics.  We have some very deep sense of what it is to
be oneself and that that this self is different than other people's self.  We
perceive that when we wake up in our bed in the morning we are the same person
who went to sleep in that same bed the previous night.  We don't go to sleep
one night as Sally and then wake up the next morning in a different bed as
Jane, nor do we have the experience of being born anew in the morning as an
entirely separate self from the person who went to sleep in the bed the
previous night.  So intuitively we believe that there is some continuity in our
conception of the self from moment to moment and day to day, and even over the
course of our lifetime even though we change dramatically from childhood to
adulthood to old age.  But the same problems at play in the problem of the self
are at play in the Ship of Theseus, but without the metaphysical baggage of
notions like consciousness and memory.

Well this is at least supposedly a podcast about the history of astronomy so we
cannot answer fundamental problems in philosophy.  But this story does
illustrate how the Greeks pulled from this cultural background to develop what
we today would regard as more serious philosophical or scientific questions.
And the fact that one of the great English philosophers, Thomas Hobbes, fifteen
centuries later, was still seriously pondering these questions provides a hint
of the impact that Greek ideas had on the development of Western intellectual
culture.

At any rate I've now told you the story of Theseus and King Minos and now you
understand the history of Minoan civilization.  Not the real history of the
Minoan Kingdom, of course, but the history of the Minoan civilization as
perceived by the ancient Greeks.  At the very beginning of this episode I
mentioned that there were two civilizations in the region that predated the
Greeks: The Minoans, whom we just discovered and the Mycenaeans.

But as with the Minoans, memories of the Mycenaean civilization also persisted
in Greek culture.  So now I'll invite you to settle in as I tell you the tale
of the remnant of Mycenaean culture in Greek memory in the myth of Perseus.
Now the tale of Theseus and King Minos had fairly limited representation in the
heavens.  The crown that Theseus or Dionysus gives to Ariadne is all that
makes it into the sky as the constellation Corona Borealis.  By contrast the
tale of Perseus sprawls out over a vast portion of the sky and spans a half
dozen constellations.

As with all great Greek heroes, Perseus is a demigod and the story of his birth
is a short tale in its own right.  At one time, the king of Argos was a man
named Acrisius.  Just like King Aegeus in the tale of Theseus, King Acrisius
was unable to produce a son and eventually, fed up, went to the Oracle of
Delphi for advice.  In a way, King Acrisius was lucky in that the oracle he
received was apparently not cryptic.  But the bad news was that he learned that
he was not to produce a son, and to make matters worse, his daughter would bear
a son who would kill him.  So naturally, King Acrisius returned home and locked
his daughter Danaë in a tower whose only opening was to the sky so that no one
could enter or leave.

Sometime later Zeus discovered Danaë locked in this tower and fell in love with
her.  So he caused a rain of gold to fall upon the tower which then impregnated
Danaë.  When King Acrisius learned that his daughter had become pregnant with
Perseus despite his best efforts to lock her away, he considered killing the
child.  But King Acrisius realized that doing so would only invite the wrath of
the Furies, the goddesses of vengeance.  So he did what any well adjusted king
would do and locked both the child and its mother in a wooden chest and then
threw the chest out to sea.

As the god of the sea, Poseidon, was Zeus's brother, this made Perseus
Poseidon's nephew, and so when King Acrisius threw the baby into the ocean,
Poseidon looked favorably on his nephew and calmed the seas and carried the
chest to the island of Seriphos.  There the chest with the baby Perseus and its
mother was discovered by a fisherman named Dictys who also happened to be
brother to the king of the island, Polydectes.  Dictys took Perseus to
Polydectes, who adopted him as his own son.

As Perseus grew up, Polydectes began to fall in love with Perseus's mother
Danaë.  But Perseus didn't entirely trust Polydectes and wouldn't let him come
close to her.  So Polydectes came up with a plan to circumvent the meddling
kid.  At the time, the bachelorette on everyone's minds was Hippodamia, the
beautiful princess of Pisa.  But her father, King Oenomaus, had heard a
prophecy that he would be killed by his son-in-law.  He therefore challenged
every suitor to Hippodamia to a chariot race.  If the suitor won, he gained the
right to marry his daughter.  But if King Oenomaus won, he would execute the
man.  King Oenomaus had mounted the heads of eighteen failed suitors around his
palace as a warning to any other young men against getting any ideas.

Well, Polydectes, Perseus's adopted father, knew that Hippodamia was sought
after enough that it would be believable if he announced that he was going to
try to marry Hippodamia.  So announce it he did and he then demanded gifts from
his courtiers.  If he was to beat King Oenomaus in a chariot race he needed the
fastest horses in the land.  So everyone in his court was to provide him a
suitable horse.

But what Polydectes knew was that Perseus had no horses and so wasn't able to
give his father any gift at all.  So Perseus instead asked Polydectes to name
anything on the Earth and he would go and capture it for him.  The trap was
then set and Polydectes asked Perseus to bring him the head of Medusa.

According to Ovid, Medusa had been a beautiful maiden, the daughter of the
primordial sea god Porcys and his sister Ceto.  Poseidon became attracted to
Medusa after seeing her in the temple of Athena and had raped her right then
and there in the temple.  This was not pleasing to Athena, but Athena, in a
terrible instance of victim blaming, blamed the victim Medusa and transformed
her into a Gorgon --- a hideous woman with snakes for hair whose gaze was so
terrifying that any poor soul who looked upon her face was immediately turned
into stone.  The gods of the ancient Greeks were not especially known for their
just dealings with mortals.

Thanks to Perseus, Medusa is the best known of the Gorgons, but there were
actually two others, Stheno and Euryale.  Although the three were sisters,
Stheno and Euryale were immortal, and Medusa, being the youngest of the three,
was mortal.  Since all three were present in the temple when Medusa was raped
Athena had transformed all three into Gorgons.

Being a demigod, Perseus had the gods on his side and Athena visited him to
provide advice for his quest and gave him a mirrored shield by which he could
look at Medusa without turning to stone.  Zeus, in turn, gave him a sword of
adamantine that he could use to slaw the Gorgon, and Hermes lent him the
Talaria, his winged sandals.  Athena then advised Perseus to find the Graeae,
three old women who were sisters of the Gorgons and who could tell Perseus the
whereabouts of Medusa.

The Graeae were so tremendously old that they had only a single eye and single
tooth among them, which they then shared between each other to speak and to
see.  Perhaps Perseus asked the Graeae nicely for the location of Medusa and
was rebuffed, or perhaps not, but at any rate as one of the old women passed
the eye to her sister, Perseus stole it and held it ransom until they told him
the location of Medusa's cave.  From them he also stole a knapsack in which to
transport Medusa's head and the helm of invisibility, a hat created by Hades
that could be worn to render the wearer invisible that the Graeae had somehow
ended up with.  In some versions the Graeae had also acquired Hermes's winged
sandals and he steals those, too rather than receiving them from Hermes
directly.  And in other versions the Graeae didn't have the helm of
invisibility but instead Athena gave it to Perseus herself.

But in the end Perseus has all the tools he needs and now knows the location of
Medusa somewhere near the end of the Earth.  He flies there using the winged
sandals of Hermes and then puts on the helm of invisibility, thereby becoming
invisible, uses the mirrored shield to find Medusa and Zeus's sword to cut off
her head.  He then puts her head in the Graeae's knapsack, and being invisible,
can flee from the wrath of Medusa's other two sisters.  Medusa, being pregnant
with the child of Poseidon, then gives birth to this child, a young man with a
golden sword named Chrysaor, and the winged horse Pegasus, both of whom spring
from the blood of her neck after her decapitation.  Incidentally, the detail
about Pegasus and Chrysaor being birthed from the blood of Medusa's neck,
rather than a more usual birth, means that these were higher births --- births
of gods rather than mortals.  In a similar way, the goddess Athena was borne
from the head of Zeus fully formed.

On the long journey back, Perseus stopped in the land of King Atlas.  Atlas was
a Titan --- one of the ancient race of gods that had originally ruled the
cosmos.  But after their children, the gods of Olympus like Zeus, Hera,
Poseidon, and all the rest of the more familiar Greek gods, had rebelled
against their parents and banished them to the underworld of Tartarus.  Atlas,
however, was banished to the end of the Earth.   The popular modern depiction
of Atlas supporting the weight of the world on his shoulders does not actually
appear in the original Greek myths.  Instead in the Greek myths he was made to
support the dome of heaven upon his shoulder.  Despite Atlas's punishment it
seems that his realm was quite lovely and although he was cursed to support the
vault of heaven upon his shoulders, he seemed to be free enough to engage in
other activities, at least for the purposes of this myth.  Most prized in his
lands was an orchard where the trees produced golden apples hanging from golden
branches amid golden leaves.

Atlas had been warned a prophecy that a son of Zeus would come to his orchard
and steal his golden apples, so when Perseus showed up and announced that he
was a son of Zeus and asked Atlas for his hospitality, Atlas immediately told
him that he was not welcome in his land and to flee, whereupon he attempted to
make Perseus leave.  Perseus, being a demigod, was strong, but no match for a
Titan.  So instead he pulled out the head of Medusa and held it before Atlas
who immediately turned to stone, thus forming the Atlas mountain range in
northern Africa.

Now the mythic narrative is a little contradictory where Atlas is concerned.
Although the Greeks related that the petrification of Atlas was the origin of
the Atlas mountains, they also insist that the prophecy that Atlas was worried
about was later fulfilled when Herecles, another son of Zeus came and stole the
golden apples as one of his 12 labors, and in that story Atlas is fine as
fettle and moving about freely to defend his precious apples.  So there's
perhaps a bit of a plot hole there, but let's maybe not get too hung up on it.

After leaving the kingdom of Atlas, Perseus was passing through Aethiopia on
his way home.  Now a quick word about Aethiopia.  To the Greeks, Aethiopia did
not just represent the modern land we call Ethiopia.  Instead Aethiopia,
spelled with an extra A in front, was the entire region of the world to the
south and west of Egypt, and particularly referred to the most distant
southwestern parts, today around the countries of Algeria and Libya.

At that time a man named Cepheus was king of Aethiopia and his wife Cassiopeia
was queen.  Cassiopeia was vain and proud and boasted that she was more
beautiful than even the sea-nymphs.  Now as you might expect, boasting that you
or anyone else for matter, is more beautiful than any goddess will not end well
for you.  Poseidon was enraged and sent a flood to destroy the land.  King
Cepheus consulted the oracle of Ammon who counseled him to sacrifice his
daughter Andromeda to Poseidon.  So King Cepheus chained his daughter to a rock
by the sea to be devoured by the great sea monster Cetus, sent by Poseidon.

And it is upon this ghastly scene that Perseus happens as he is flying through
Aethiopia.  He sees a beautiful woman chained to a rock and Cetus fast
approaching.  So Perseus comes to the rescue.  In some tellings of the story,
before saving her from the terrible sea monster, he takes some time to bargain
with her parents and gets them to agree that if he saves her she will marry
him.

Well regardless of the details he slays Cetus with his sword and saves
Andromeda and there is a grand feast and everyone celebrates.  Or almost
everyone anyway.  An awkward detail that King Cepheus and Cassiopeia left out
when they were frantically bargaining with Perseus is that she was actually
already engaged to someone else.  King Cepheus had already betrothed her to his
own brother, Andromeda's uncle, Phineus.  My most accounts Phineus wasn't
especially interested in Andromeda except as a way to gain the Aethiopian
throne.  But with his political ambitions crumbling before his eyes Phineus was
not at all happy during the banquet and at some point snapped and threw his
spear at Perseus.  Evidently Phineus was a poor shot because he missed, but
then all hell broke loose in the banquet hall as all of Phineus's friends
proceeded to brawl with the guests of King Cepheus who came to like Perseus and
were on his side.

In the middle of this general chaos, Perseus shouted, "Let all who are my
friends avert their eyes" and raised up the head of Medusa, thereby turning
Phineus's allies into stone.  Well, it seems to me something of a miracle that
this gimmick didn't turn everyone else at the banquet into stone, too, because I
think I would have looked at anyone who had shouted that in the middle of a
fight no matter whose side I was on.  But I suppose that just goes to show that
I would have made a poor Bronze age warrior anyhow.

Now somehow Phineus himself had not looked upon the head of Medusa, and seeing
that all his friends had turned to stone, begged Perseus with his face turned
to the side to spare his life.  But Perseus was one stone-cold man and swung
the face of Medusa in front of Phineus's face and turned him to stone anyway.

This entire episode features prominently in the night sky.  Near the north
celestial pole we have the constellations Cepheus and Cassiopeia.  Cepheus is a
little faint, but Cassiopeia makes a recognizable 'W' or 'M' shape depending
on the season and time of night and represents Cassiopeia sitting on her
throne.  The story is that the gods placed Cassiopeia so close to the north
celestial pole so that 50% of the time she would be upside down, in a lesson of
humility towards the gods.  A little south of Cassiopeia and Cepheus is the
constellation of Andromeda, their daughter, and the three constellations
together thereby make up the royal family.  To the west is the constellation of
Pegasus, the winged horse that sprung from the neck of Medusa after her
decapitation.  Three of the stars of Pegasus along with one of the stars of
Andromeda make an asterism known as the Great Square of Pegasus.  Then to the
east of Andromeda is the constellation of none other than Perseus himself, and
a little ways south of Andromeda is the great constellation of Cetus, the sea
monster, one of the largest constellations in the sky.  The constellation of
Cetus itself is a part of another vast region of the sky known as the Sea or
the Water where a large number of watery constellations are all clustered next
to each other.  Adjacent to Cetus we have Eridanus, the river and Pisces, the
fish, which in turn is next to Aquarius, the water bearer, and then is next to
Pisces Austrinus, the southern fish.  And these two are next to Capricornus,
the sea goat, which then turns into Delphinus, the dolphin.  Capricornus,
Aquarius, and Pisces are all zodiacal constellations and may have gained their
watery associations because the Sun passes through them during winter, which is
the rainy season in the Mediterranean.

Well before I get too carried away with all this astronomy, we should wrap up
the story of Perseus, but you will be relieved to hear that it is getting close
to the happily ever after ending.  Perseus and his new bride Andromeda return
to Seriphos where his adopted father Polydectes had evidently attempted to take
advantage of Perseus's absence and had violently thrust himself upon Perseus's
mother Danaë, forcing her into hiding.  Upon learning of this Perseus then
petrifies Polydectes with Medusa's head and coronates as king Polydectes's
brother, the fisherman Dictys, who had originally discovered Perseus and his
mother in the wooden chest.  Having fulfilled his quest, Perseus returned the
sword to Zeus, the winged sandals to Hermes, and gave the head of Medusa to
Athena as a gift, who mounted it upon her shield.

The final episode of the adventures of Perseus varies in the telling, but in
one version Perseus's grandfather, King Acrisius, heard of Perseus's exploits
and that he was coming home.  As you'll recall, King Acrisius had been worried
about the prophecy that the son of his daughter was to kill him.  Fearing that
Perseus would try to come home to Argos, Acrisius left for Larissa where there
happened to be an athletic competition.  Unbeknownst to him Perseus had already
arrived at Larissa and was competing in that very competition.  During one of
the games, Perseus's discus throw veered off course and struck his father,
killing him, thereby fulfilling the prophecy.

Although Perseus was the heir to the throne in Argos, he voluntarily exiled
himself since he had come to the throne by killing its occupant, even if
inadvertently.  So Perseus gave the throne to his cousin Megapenthes and
Perseus wandered off into the countryside.  At some point during his wanderings
he either dropped his hat or the top of his sword, or found a particularly
interesting mushroom, all of which mean mycenae in Greece, and there founded
the city of Mycenae and the Mycenaean civilization where, unusually for Greek
mythology, he lived happily ever after with his wife Andromeda.  Well, some
versions do have him coming across the head of Medusa as an old man, trying to
kill some people with it, finding that it doesn't seem to work, and then taking
a look at it himself, whereupon he himself turned into stone in an ancient
version of looking down the barrel of a gun and pulling the trigger when it
doesn't fire at your enemies.  But most accounts don't deal with the death of
Perseus which would probably imply that there was nothing interesting to tell
there and that he died peacefully as an old man.

So there you have it, the Greek histories of Minoan and Mycenaean civilization.
As I discussed in the first episode of this series, I think that it's important
that we try to understand the development of astronomy in the context of the
cultures where the science was developed rather than trying to impose our own
modern ideas about what ancient science should be.  These myths were deeply
ingrained in the Greek mindset and this inevitably influenced the development
of astronomical thought, either through the implications these stories had for
cosmology and cosmogony, or as a reaction against these ideas by freethinkers,
who in turn, suffered sanctions from the broader society for rejecting accepted
modes of thought.

We'll notice a few things about these two histories.  The first is that they
are fundamentally heroic.  By this I mean that the histories are not at all
concerned with most of the things that we moderners are interested in, like who
the common people were, how many of them there were, what their customs and
political structures were, or anything of the sort.  The histories are focused
almost exclusively on the actions of a small number of heroic figures: kings,
queens, princes, and their dealings with great monsters and the like.

Another feature of this history is that they are not so interested in the
literal truth or consistency of the narrative.  They tend much more to be
interested in good storytelling and moral teaching.  So these Greek tales bear
some similarities but also some differences to the Israelite and Babylonian
histories we encountered in our earlier episodes.  The Israelite history, in
particular, was similar in that the main concern of the authors of the books of
the Hebrew Bible was the moral lessons their stories told.  When Israel was
ruled by kings who were faithful to God and obedient to His law, Israel
prospered.  When the kings were faithless and turned to strange gods, Israel
suffered.  But unlike the Greek myths, the ancient Israelites placed a much
higher premium on developing a canonical version of their texts.  We have some
evidence of competing stories, most notably the two creation stories told in
the first two chapters of Genesis, but this is the exception rather than the
rule of the Hebrew Bible.  By contrast in Greece, it seems that the broad
outlines of the important mythic stories were well known, but Greek authors had
a lot of freedom to elaborate on the details of these stories as they saw fit.
And they felt no compunction to ensure that their version was consistent with
versions that other authors had told before them.

This freewheeling intellectual culture was really one of the hallmarks that
distinguished Greek civilization from other civilizations in Mesopotamia.  Like
the Greeks, the Babylonians had writing, and in fact had developed it far
earlier than them.  But writing among the Babylonians was limited to a special
class of people and was reserved for very important documents.  But in Greece
it seems that everyone had some new idea in them and was writing that idea
down.  Now unfortunately, as we'll discuss in probably the next episode, many
of these works were lost, but we have other works that referred to them and
classicists have worked out a complex web of citations, paraphrase, quotations,
and plagiarism of many of these earlier works from later works which do
survive.  This kind of intellectual free-for-all just didn't exist in
Babylonia.

The Greek myths also put a stronger emphasis on the heroic than the stories
told in the Hebrew Bible, which is itself already very focused on the actions
of a small number of heroic figures.  But a consistent theme throughout the
Hebrew Bible is also the relationship that God establishes between Himself and
the people of Israel through his various covenants.  The Book of Exodus
prominently features the deeds of Moses and Aaron, but then has a great deal to
say about how the people as a whole behaved as well, either by assenting to the
covenant that God presented to them through Moses or by rejecting it by
worshiping the golden calf.  But the Greek people as a whole really feature
very little in the Greek myths at all.  The closest we come to a representation
of the Greek people is the device of the chorus in Greek theatre.  During the
play there would be a collection of people standing together on stage who would
comment on the goings-on on stage to provide the dramatic reaction of the Greek
people to the actions of the heroes.  But nevertheless, unlike the Israelite
people in the Hebrew Bible, the Greek chorus was a passive character and rarely
had any causal impact on the drama on stage.

There is one other feature of these myths that is especially relevant for our
narrative about the history of astronomy --- namely that the stories --- and
thereby the gods --- became intertwined with the heavens.  The Greeks were not
unique in this regard.  Every civilization has picked out constellations on the
sky and has developed stories to identify with the constellations, and more
broadly has associated the sky with the divine.  But the fact is that the
standard 88 constellations we have today are largely the same as the ancient
Greeks, not those of any other culture.  Now, the Greeks borrowed some of their
constellations from the Babylonians, but it is not the fact that those
constellations were Babylonian that we still have them --- rather they only
survived to today because the Greeks happened to adopt them.  Likewise we don't
identify any of the Egyptian constellations, or any of the constellations of
the Celts, Norse, Vandals, or any of the other dozens of tribal peoples that
populated Europe.  Our constellations today are just one of the fossils of
Greek science that persist to modernity as a consequence of the massive
influence that the ancient Greeks had on the development of astronomy and the
sciences more generally in the West.

Now from what I've said to this point, there is nothing tremendously unique
about the thought of the Greeks.  They had wonderful myths, yes, but so has
every other culture.  But it is important to understand the origins of Greek
thought in order to understand how it evolved other ways of understanding the
world aside from the mythic.

As we had discussed in the previous episodes, the Babylonians had developed a
sophisticated set of procedures to predict the patterns of behavior in the sky,
but were never really interested in understanding anything deeper than that.
The Greeks were different --- not immediately, as we have seen, but eventually,
and we will next come to that.  But it is late now and so we'll have to trace
the development of this thought in the next episode.  I hope you'll join me
then.  Until the next full moon, good night and clear skies.
