---
layout: episode
number: 2
title: The Stars over Babylon
date: 2021-2-28
description: |
    What are the earliest records of constellations? How did the ancient
    Babylonians keep track of their progress through the year? And how do we
    know what we know about Babylonia?
categories: episodes
---

## Transcript

Good evening, and welcome to The Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy with new episodes every full moon.  My name is Joe Antognini.
Tonight we will be embarking on our journey through the history of astronomy
and starting with the earliest civilization that left detailed written
astronomical records --- the ancient Babylonians.

But before we start describing exactly what the ancient Babylonians discovered,
and how, we should start by taking a more general look at the attitude of the
ancient peoples towards the heavens.  Because the ancient peoples looked at the
heavens differently than we moderners do today.  The main difference is ---
they actually looked.

Almost every person listening to this today, is living in a city that is
incomprehensibly larger than the cities of the ancient world.  Even a modest
town by the standards of the twenty-first century world would be at least an
order of magnitude larger than the largest metropolises four thousand years
ago.

And it is not simply the population that is important.  Today's cities differ
from their ancient forbears in the quantity and quality of their illumination.
Around the early nineteenth century, cities began illuminating streets during
the night for the safety of their citizens.  With the invention of the
automobile, nighttime illumination became an even more pressing issue of safety
and good government.  Today anyone who has traveled by plane knows that you are
getting close to landing at night when you start to see more and more lights
out the window.  We can viscerally see the lack of development in North Korea
relative to its southern neighbor just by looking at satellite photographs of
the two countries at night.

But these city lights don't simply illuminate the streets below them.  They
reflect up off of the streets and then scatter in the atmosphere.  This
illuminates not only the street, but the sky above it, and washes out the
stars.

In a twenty-first century city it is possible to see some stars, but not many.
In a way, this is more unfortunate than losing the stars altogether.  If we
couldn't see any stars at all, we would at least know that we had lost
something.  But because we can see a few stars, we don't realize how much
richer the sky is without the ambient light from the city.

Well it was not so in the ancient world.  Without the profusion of artificial
light, the nighttime sky was far richer even in the center of the world's
largest cities than most moderners realize.  We moderners must make a concerted
effort to view the sky as it was seen by our ancient forbears.  We must travel
hundreds of miles away from the nearest outpost of civilization to escape the
illuminated skies we've created for ourselves.  And even then, hundreds of
miles away from the nearest city, its glow can usually still be seen on the
horizon.  But most of us moderners have never gotten this far from civilization
and have never seen what a really dark sky looks like with our own eyes.

And even those of us who have gone camping or otherwise escaped to the
wilderness and seen with our own eyes the richness of the truly dark sky are
missing something.  Because those of us who see it when we are camping, only
see it when we are camping.  What is qualitatively different about the ancient
world is that the richest, darkest sky we have ever seen, *is what the sky
always looked like for everyone, every night of their lives*.  When we see the
shapes of the constellations and think that they don't look anything like what
they're supposed to and you'd need to have a pretty good imagination to think
that that cluster of stars looks like a dog or a lion, what we fail to
understand is that the ancients didn't see that group of stars every once in a
while, when they could escape from it all.  They saw those stars every night
from birth to death.  It takes some effort for us moderners to recognize the
constellations, but to any of our ancient forbears, knowing the sky intimately
was the most natural thing in the world.

How early did humanity recognize the stars of the sky?  We can only imagine it
dates back to the very dawn of humanity, tens of thousands of years ago.  But
unfortunately we have little conclusive evidence for much of anything about the
way of life of early humanity, nevertheless the astronomy of the earliest
peoples.  Which is a shame really, because some 90% of all people ever to have
lived, lived during this prehistoric period, so it would be nice to know more
about them than we do.  But as they did not leave much evidence for us to go
off of, it's hard to rigorously conclude much about them.  In a future episode
we will spend some time doing some discussion, mostly speculative, about the
astronomy of prehistoric peoples.  But for the time being we will stay on more
solid ground.

So we have to imagine that the forbears of the ancient Babylonians had created
constellations and associated myths with those constellations.  Just as has
every culture that has walked this Earth as far as we know.  And we can
actually find some circumstantial evidence for constellations going quite far
back --- possibly as far as 20 or 30 thousand years in the past.  But the
further we go back, the sketchier the evidence gets.  So we will start a little
bit later than that, sometime after writing had been developed in Mesopotamia,
with an inscription in a temple constructed by King Gudea, sometime around 2130
BC.  This inscription describes King Gudea's inspiration for building the
temple.  It reads, quote:

> "My shepherd," said the goddess, "I shall read for you your dream.  The man
> whose stature filled sky and earth, whose crown proclaimed him a god, and whose
> side was the Imdugud bird; storm at his feet, and to right and left two lions,
> was the god, my brother, Ningirsu.  His command to you was to build his temple
> Eninnu.  Now, the sun that rose from the earth before you was your guardian
> god, Ningizzida: like a sun, his serpent form rises from the earth.  The woman
> holding a stylus and tablet of constellations, rapt as it were in thought , was
> the goddess, my sister Nisaba, showing to you the auspicious star for your
> building of the temple.  The second man, a warrior, with lapis lazuli tablet,
> was the god Nin-dub, designing for you the temple's structure.  And the ass,
> laden, at the right of the king: that was yourself, ready for your task.

The description of this auspicious star tells us that the heavens were of
astrological importance right back to the very first records we have of the
stars.  But even more interestingly, the description of the woman holding a
tablet of constellations, seems to suggest that a fixed set of constellations
had been developed in Mesopotamia by this point.

An important source of evidence comes from cylinder seals.  We have, from later
records during the Neo-Assyrian Empire, more than a thousand years later,
around 900 to 600 BC, much more detailed descriptions of the constellations of
this region from a variety of textual sources.  But in addition to those
sources, we have cylinder seals from that era which depict the constellations
described in these other documents.  Cylinder seals are small cylinders,
usually around an inch or so high, with engraved images around its side.  The
cylinder could then be rolled onto a surface of wet clay to imprint an image.
Cylinder seals were used for a variety of purposes, artistic and religious, but
were also an early form of signature.  By the time of the Neo-Assyrian Empire,
there is abundant evidence that the gods were associated with various celestial
objects, particularly the planets.  From these associations we can start to
match certain figures seen on cylinder seals to the corresponding celestial
object.  Some of these are fairly obvious --- a lunar crescent represents the
Moon, seven dots represent the Pleiades.  A less obvious symbol --- but one
which other documents make clear --- is the goddess Inanna-Ishtar for the
planet Venus and a lion for the Sun.  In some cylinder seals, Inanna-Ishtar is
depicted seated on a throne with a lion on a leash, representing the observed
fact that Venus is never far from the Sun.  One might suspect that this is
reading into the symbolism a little too much, but some of these seals are
really quite replete with astronomical symbolism.  Not only is Inanna-Ishtar
pictured with a lion, the Sun, but a lunar crescent as well, along with the god
Adad standing on a bull, Taurus, and a creature half-man-half-scorpion,
representing the constellation Scorpius.  Other seals contain a second lion
next to a pair of objects, sometimes date palms, which represents the
constellation Leo next to the constellation Gemini.  (Sticklers may object that
this skips over the constellation Cancer, but Cancer is a much fainter
constellation and was likely identified later once astronomy had developed
enough to recognize the importance of the zodiac.)  The interesting thing about
these cylinders, is that although the written corroborations of these
astronomical interpretations are more recent, cylinder seals with very similar
symbolism go back much further, before we have any real written records of the
specific nature of the constellations.  So it is plausible that by 2000 BC, the
Babylonians had identified a set of constellations, many of which are similar
to constellations we identify today.

Now, of course, we must always remain open to the possibility that the stars
identified with these constellations changed over this period of a thousand
years.  We don't exactly know what constellations the Babylonians of 2000 BC
had identified, we only have some evidence that they had identified *some*
constellations.  But it is certainly plausible that the constellations remained
fairly static over this time period.  The eye is naturally drawn to certain
groupings of stars on the sky.  We see that cultures across the globe have
independently associated the same groups of stars together into constellations.
The Big Dipper, Taurus, Scorpius, and other constellations have been variously
recognized as distinct constellations by cultures as far flung as the ancient
Babylonians, the Javanese, and Hawaiians. In some cases, disparate cultures
have even independently associated those constellations with the same mythic
creature.  The ancient Greeks identified Orion as a great hunter, as did the
Seri of northwest Mexico.

Moreover, the motion of the Moon naturally enhances the importance of other
groups of stars.  The Moon changes its position on the sky over the course of a
month, but it doesn't just move randomly around the sky.  Its motions are
constrained to lie within a fairly narrow band of constellations on the sky.
In fact, it doesn't take too much observation to realize that this is true of
*all* the planets and the Sun, to boot.  No matter where they move, they all
appear against the background of this narrow band of constellations.  Today we
call this band of constellations the zodiac, meaning "the circle of the little
animals", the reason being that most of these constellations are animals.
Historically, for reasons we'll go into in a future episode, the zodiac
contained twelve constellations, but today, strictly speaking, a thirteenth
constellation, Ophiuchus, actually overlaps with the zodiac as well.

But even prior to the systematization of the zodiac, the ancient Babylonians
recognized the regular path of the Moon across a certain set of stars.  Since a
month is approximately 28 days, they identified 28 small groupings of stars,
approximately equally spaced across the Moon's path, that they could use to
trace the Moon's progression through the month.  This way, in addition to
simply counting the days since the last new moon, ancient Babylonian
astronomers could determine which grouping the Moon was closest to to figure
out how far into the month they were. This is much more accurate than trying to
estimate by eye how close to full the Moon is.  These groupings of stars are
variously known as "moon stations", "moon houses", or "moon mansions".

And it is not clear that these moon stations were originally developed by the
ancient Babylonians.  The concept of moon stations was also present in Indian
and Chinese astronomy, and these three cultures identified almost exactly the
same moon stations as each other.  It's unknown whether one of these cultures
developed it first and the concept spread from there to the others, or if they
identified the moon stations independently and happened to come up with the
same groupings.  After all, they were all looking at the same Moon and
observing the same stars.

Now, if you have looked at the sky with some attention, and of course you would
have if you were living in the ancient world, you would have noticed that in
addition to the motion of the Moon, the sky itself slowly changes over the
course of a year.  The constellations that are visible to you change from
season to season.  Someone in the northern hemisphere, say around the city of
Babylon, who looked straight up after a sunset in the early summer, would be
looking at the modern constellation of Bootes, the herdsman.  But by early
fall, Bootes would no longer be straight above, but low on the western horizon.
Instead straight above you would be Cygnus, the Swan.  By early winter, Bootes
would no longer be visible at all.  By the time spring came around, Bootes
would now start to be visible low on the eastern horizon shortly before
sunrise.

Ancient peoples were well aware of this gradual, annual change of the
constellations.  And they would look at specific stars and use them to keep
track of the seasons.  At one point during the year, a star would be observed
directly overhead right after sunset.  Over the course of the night it would
then sink towards the west around midnight.  But with each passing day, right
after sunset, it would be seen to be slightly lower towards the western
horizon.  It would then be visible for a slightly shorter period of time.
After several months, it would only be briefly visible low on the western
horizon shortly after sunset before following the Sun below the horizon.  Then
it would disappear entirely for some time, usually several months.  Eventually,
it would be briefly visible on the *eastern* horizon, just before sunrise until
the Sun rose along with it and washed it out in the sky.  As more time passed,
the star would rise earlier and earlier in the morning until it was once again
overhead at sunset, completing the annual cycle.  The day of the year on which
the star was first visible after the months-long period of having disappeared
from the night sky was of crucial importance to the ancient peoples.  It was so
important that we give this event its own name: the heliacal rising.  By
looking for the heliacal risings of various stars, ancient peoples had a very
accurate way of charting their progress through the year.

The Babylonians used this technique to great effect.  There is a tablet listing
36 stars, roughly evenly spaced east to west, that were used to keep track of
their progress through the year, so that there were roughly three heliacal
risings every month.  And there is a reference to these 36 stars in the great
Babylonian creation myth, Enuma Elish, which was recorded on seven clay tablets
sometime between 1900 and 1600 BC.  One portion of it describes the acts of the
greatest God of the Babylonians, named Marduk, and reads:

> Marduk made the stations for the great gods,
> The stars, their images, the constellations he fixed,
> He ordained the year and into sections he divided it.
> For the twelve months he fixed three stars.
> The Moon god he caused to shine forth, the night he entrusted to him.
> He appoint him, a being of the night, to determine the days.

So very early on the Babylonians had developed a very systematic way of
tracking these heliacal risings.  But this technique was by no means limited
to them.  Cultures across the globe have looked for the heliacal risings of
particular stars to mark the beginnings of certain seasons and observe certain
rituals.  The Egyptians looked for the heliacal rising of Sirius to mark the
beginning of their calendar.  Much further east, the aboriginal Australians and
Maori of New Zealand used the heliacal rising of the Pleiades star cluster to
mark the beginning of winter.  And the Javanese used the rising of Orion to
mark the beginning of the working season.  Conveniently, from the southern
hemisphere, Orion is shaped rather like a plough, so if there was no plough
visible in the sky, they did no work.  Heliacal risings are an important
feature of ancient astronomy and we will talk much more about them in future
episodes.

But this perhaps raises the question of why these heliacal risings are so
important to so many cultures.  It does seem like a bit of a bother to keep
track of them.  Perhaps the ancients had nothing better to do with their time.
But maybe we can come up with a better answer than that.  And there are two
answers one can give.  The first is simple, and not really wrong per se.
But it leads to a second, more complicated answer.

The first answer as to why the ancients kept track of heliacal risings and,
more generally, the months, was that it is important for agriculture.
Agricultural societies needed to know when to reap and when to sow.  And the
sowing was the more important part here.  Anyone can figure out when the crops
are ripe and ready to be reaped.  But when you sow, you can't do it too early,
or else an early frost could wipe out the crop.  But the harder part is that
you also can't do it too late or else winter may come and kill your crops
before they ripen.

We see the intimate connection between the months and agriculture through the
symbols the Sumerians used for their months.  The fourth month was the symbols
"seed" and "hand" next to each other.  The symbol for the tenth month was the
symbols "corn" and "cutting" next to each other.  The eleventh month was "corn"
and "house".  Around the city of Ur, the eighth month meant "loosening the
plough".  By no means do all of the months correspond to agricultural
activities, the first month of the Babylonian year means "month of beginning",
and many of the months in various calendars in Mesopotamian societies refer to
various festivals.  But agricultural activities make a large enough presence
that we can infer that the calendar was regulating these activities.

And we see evidence for the link between the calendar and agriculture in other
societies as well.  The most obvious evidence for this is that many cultures
didn't bother to keep track of time at all during winter, when agriculture
didn't take place.  This was the case in Java and also in early Roman society.
In fact, the vestiges of this practice remain with us today.  You may have
noticed that the month of September has the root "sept-" for seven.  But
September is the seventh month.  Similarly October has the root "oct-" for
eight, but is the tenth month, and so on with November and December.  They're
all off by two.  And it's even worse than that because in fact August was
originally called Sextillus and July Quintillus, using the roots for sixth and
fifth, respectively, until two Roman emperors decided to name those months
after themselves.  Well, originally, these months were in the right place.
September was the seventh month, October was the eighth month, and so on with
November and December.  There were only ten months in the calendar.  The Romans
didn't bother to keep track of the winter months --- January and February were
later additions to the calendar.  But they were originally added to the *end*
of the calendar, so that September through December remained the seventh
through tenth months.  This worked because the Roman year originally began in
March at the vernal equinox.  It was only later that the new year was put at
the beginning of January and messed up the locations of September through
December in the calendar.  But I'm getting ahead of myself.

The point is that we see a clear relationship between calendars and agriculture
across many societies, including the societies of ancient Mesopotamia.  So that
is the simple answer to the question of why these societies kept track of
heliacal risings, and by extension the months.

The difficulty with this simple answer is that it raises a natural question ---
agriculture is highly dependent on the weather.  Of course there are annual
weather patterns, but day to day, the weather is quite variable.  An
agricultural society needs to account for frosts and thaws when deciding when
best to sow.  And the last frost in a region can easily vary by several weeks.
So why bother with the precision of heliacal risings, if you only need to
generally know the time of year to within a few weeks?

The answer here maybe gets a little hand-wavey.  And perhaps we can't really
say 100% for sure.  But it seems that the need for this precision arises from
the fact that as city-states started to grow to encompass tens thousands of
subjects, precision in time-keeping became necessary to coordinate the
activities across this large group of people.  It's simply not feasible to plan
in advance with so many people without some means of synchronization.

This was particularly the case for religious ceremonies.  Most of the month
names in ancient Mesopotamia that don't refer to agriculture refer to a
festival of some kind.  If you want everyone to stop working to enjoy a
festival on the same day, you need some way to keep track of the days --- just
knowing where you are in the year to within a few weeks or so isn't going to
cut it.

Where things start to get messy is that these societies in ancient Mesopotamia
used the motions of the Moon to keep track of the months, but also used
heliacal risings to keep track of where they were in the year.  It is likely
that the predecessors of the Babylonians, along with other civilizations in
Mesopotamia like the ancient Israelites, began tracking the motion of the Moon
prior to heliacal risings.  We believe this because various religious festivals
correspond to dates in certain lunar months, not dates with respect to heliacal
risings.  The heliacal risings, by contrast, correspond to dates for
agricultural activities.  It is probable that these cultures had adopted their
Moon-based religious practices prior to the time they settled and adopted
agriculture.

Well, as I talked about in the last episode, this presents a problem.  Because
the length of the month does not neatly divide the length of a year.  So if you
have twelve lunar months in a year, you will be about nine days short This
means that the following year, the months will be nine days earlier with
respect to the seasons than they were the year before.  And the following year
will be another nine days earlier, and so eighteen days earlier than the first
year.  And each year will get another nine days off.  It doesn't take long
before this starts to be a serious problem --- after just four years your
calendar will be off by more than a whole month.

Now, there are a couple of things you can do when this happens.  One is to just
not care.  This is the approach that the Arabians took and is still with us in
Islam today.  The Islamic calendar is a purely lunar calendar, and consequently
cycles through the solar calendar.  Some years the holy month of Ramadan is in
summer and the fasts are long.  And other years Ramadan is in winter and the
fasts are shorter.  Another approach is rather than stop caring about the solar
calendar, stop caring about the lunar calendar.  This was the approach of the
ancient Egyptians, and is our approach today.  Now the months don't correspond
to the motions of the Moon, and only retain the vestige of the lunar influence
in the fact that the length of the month is approximately the time it takes for
the moon to go through its cycles.  Sometimes a new moon is at the beginning of
the month, or sometimes its a full moon, but usually it's just somewhere in
between.

But neither of these two approaches will work if you want to care about both
the Moon and the seasons.  And the ancient Babylonians did care about both.
They cared about the Moon, presumably for religious reasons, and they cared
about the seasons for agricultural reasons.  In this case, what the ancient
Mesopotamians did (as did all cultures that have wanted to simultaneously use
lunar and solar calendars) is a technique called intercalation.  The idea
behind intercalation is that most of the time you have twelve months in a year,
but then the months start to drift earlier in the year.  And then after a few
years, they drift too much and you decide to have a special year with an extra,
thirteenth month.  This then resets the months to their correct place with
respect to the seasons and gives you a few normal years for it to drift back
before you need the extra month again.

Initially this process of intercalation was very ad hoc.  Records from ancient
Israel indicate that the priests would go out into the fields to inspect the
crops two weeks before the appointed harvest time.  If the crops appeared to be
too far from ripening they would declare an extra month.  Ancient Babylonian
priests did much the same thing and would declare an extra month in the year
when they felt that the months were drifting too far with respect to the
seasons.  Not coincidentally, this extra month would come before the harvest
month to push the harvest back to the proper time.

Early on, these extra months were somewhat surprise events and considered to be
at the very least an unlucky omen.  And even worse, sometimes this had to be
done two years in a row.  And occasionally, in very bad circumstances, the
calendar had drifted far enough that the priests decided that it was necessary
that two extra months be added in the same year.  When this was done, one of
the extra months was put before the harvest month, which was the 11th, and the
other was put after the sixth month, called Ululu.  This second extra month was
simply called second Ululu or Ululu II.  In the period from 2000 to 1600 BC
there does not appear to be much evidence that these intercalations were
planned for.  In fact we have a letter during the reign of King Hammurabi which
reads:

> Thus Hammurabi speaks: "Since the year is not good, the next month must be
> noted as a second Ululu.  Instead of delivering the tithes to Babylon on the
> 25th of Tashritu, have them delivered on the 25th of Ululu II."

What is going on here is that this second Ululu needed to be added to the
calendar, but existing contracts specified that the court was to receive taxes,
which were at the time food like barley, on the 25th of Tashritu.  Since this
second Ululu month suddenly appeared, food to the royal court would be delayed
by an entire month unless the contract was revised.  Adding an extra month to
the calendar was not a trivial affair --- proclamations had to go out,
contracts had to be revised, it could potentially be a mess.

So we now start to see some of the value of keeping track of heliacal risings.
Although for basic agricultural purposes it wasn't so important to keep track
of the progress through the year with great precision, once you have a whole
society that needs to stay coordinated with itself, keeping track of heliacal
risings could give the priests advance notice as to when the months are
starting to drift from their proper locations in the year and give them time to
plan for addition of the extra month.

By roughly 600 BC, the Babylonians had discovered a regular pattern that seemed
to keep the months more or less in sync with the seasons.  This cycle, called
the Metonic cycle, lasted 19 years, and in it, the 3rd, 6th, 8th, 11th, 14th,
17th, and 19th years all had the extra thirteenth month.  The rest had the
usual twelve.  Over the course of 19 years you would have 235 months.  This is
in fact very close to the actual number of synodic months that are in a year
--- it is off by only about six and a half minutes.  Or put another way, the
calendar drifts by only one day every 219 years.  So once the Babylonians had
discovered the Metonic cycle, along with other civilizations of the near East
like the ancient Israelites, it served them well for a very long time.  But we
will get into that more in a future episode.

You may have noticed that at certain points during this episode I've been a
little vague about dates.  Or when I've given dates, I've provided a very wide
range, encompassing centuries.  Unfortunately, the ancients rarely dated the
artifacts that they left us.  And even when they did, they of course did not
use a dating system that is at all useful to us.  In the ancient world,
particularly in the earlier periods, years were counted based on how many years
it was into a particular king's reign.  So you would say, that these events
occurred in say, the seventh year of King Hammurabi.  Unfortunately this
system treats each king as being a completely independent timekeeping system.
If you know that one event occurred in the seventh year of Hammurabi, and
another occurred in the third year of Gudea, you have no idea how far apart
these two events occurred or even which one happened first.  The only way to
piece together absolute dates is to put together a chronology of the kings in
the empire --- and you have to be sure to get the lengths of their reigns
correct because any errors will affect all of your dates thereafter.  And it
goes without saying that you'll be in real trouble if you've missed any!

Now this was as much an issue for the ancient Babylonians as it is for us
today.  By the time of the Seleucid Empire around 300 BC, the scribes must have
gotten sick of keeping track of how long ago particular events occurred, maybe
after a string of especially short lived kings, and by this point started to
keep track of continuous stretches of time marked from a single date, just as
we do today.  They used the beginning of the Seleucid Dynasty and this period
has come to be known as the Seleucid Period.  But how do we correspond the
start of the Seleucid Period to a year we are familiar with in the modern
Gregorian calendar?

Identifying absolute dates is a very, very difficult problem in archaeology,
particularly when dealing with events this far back in the past.  Over the
decades, archaeologists have been able to add tools to their toolkits to help
establish a proper chronology: radiocarbon dating, records of king lists,
correspondences of events with other cultures, tree rings.  And astronomy.
Astronomy has played a really unique, strange role in the establishment of this
chronology.

The kind of evidence that astronomy can provide in establishing the chronology
of ancient Mesopotamia is important enough that it's perhaps worth at this
point digressing a little bit to talk about this role.  Up to this point I've
been telling this history with a sort of "view from nowhere."  I, the
narrator, am simply transmitting facts to you, the listener, that historians
and archaeologists, in all their erudition and careful scholarship, simply know
to be fact.  But of course these facts were not always known.  Indeed, after
the fall of the Roman Empire, not much at all was known about Mesopotamia in
the West.  The only ancient texts that Western scholars had access to were some
Greek texts (which largely came via the medieval Islamic empires), and, of
course, the Biblical texts.  Thanks to those Biblical texts, during the Middle
Ages scholars in the West knew of the existence of various ancient peoples in
the near East like the Babylonians and Assyrians.  But they didn't know much
more than that.  In fact it wasn't until the 12th century that the Jewish
traveler Benjamin of Tudela rediscovered the ruins of the city of Nineveh.
During the Medieval Era, Nineveh was best known from the Book of Jonah as a
city filled with sinners that comes to repentance, thanks to the somewhat
reluctant efforts of the prophet Jonah.  But of course in the ancient world,
the perceptions of a minor kingdom in the Levant called Judea were not
especially important.  In the decades prior to 612 BC, Nineveh was the largest
city in the world, a metropolis of enviable wealth, the capital of the great
Assyrian Empire, and a center of world culture.  Yet by the Middle Ages, next
to nothing was known about this city, not even its location, until the travels
of Benjamin of Tudela.

And Nineveh was not unique.  So it was with the other great cities and empires
of the Near East.  Some descriptions existed in the Hebrew Bible, but of
course, the Biblical texts are more theological in nature and when they wrote
their histories, they wrote them from the particular point of view of the
Jewish peoples in the Levant.  The various empires that they interacted with
were mostly portrayed as havens of sin and idolatry, sources of destruction and
ruin.  Wretched hives of scum and villainy, if you will.  Modern theologians
tend to read these texts metaphorically, with Babylon being a symbol of sin and
its capacity for spiritual destruction, but given that these empires were
rivals of the ancient Israelites the original intent was likely quite literal.
A few Greek references to these ancient Mesopotamian empires had also survived,
but they were few and of dubious quality.  

European knowledge of ancient Mesopotamia did not really progress for many
centuries.  Every now and again a European traveller to the near East would
report on what he saw, and several of these travellers reported a strange kind
of writing on the inscriptions of buildings and monuments.  But serious
attempts at deciphering this writing, called cuneiform, did not begin until the
Enlightenment in the 1700s.  Copies of some of these inscriptions were published in
Europe in 1711, and a much larger tranche of inscriptions was published
in 1767.  By the end of the century, European philologists had deduced the word
for "King."

Things really took of in the 1800s as Napoleon's invasion of Egypt brought back
a tremendous number of ancient sources to Europe.  Of course most of the
interest was focused on Egypt, but the decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphs by
the french philologist Jean-Francois Champollion in the subsequent decades,
allowed Assyriologists to correlate cuneiform texts against Egyptian texts.  By
the mid-1800s, Assyriologists had realized that the cuneiform texts were not
all in one language.  Over the following decades they began to understand
portions of Elamite, Babylonian, Akkadian, and Sumerian texts, partly due to
diligent study and some guesswork, and partly due to a wave of archaeological
expeditions that returned many more inscriptions that they could work with,
particularly the excavation of the Library of Ashurbanipal in 1849 and 1851.

In 1857 four scholars claimed to be able to read Akkadian texts and these
claims were put to a test.  The secretary of the Royal Asiatic Society, Edwin
Norris, selected an inscription of a newly discovered artifact and gave this
inscription to the four scholars.  They then independently translated the
inscription and presented their translations to a panel of judges who
determined how closely these translations agreed with each other.  All four
translations agreed in the overall sense of the text, and the translations of
two of the more experienced Assyriologists, Henry Rawlinson and Edward Hincks
agreed almost perfectly with one another.

Of course this is glossing over a history that could be an entire podcast
series in its own right.  But for our purposes things get really interesting
towards the end of the century, when the Assyriologist Hugo Winckler made the
first attempt at deciphering astronomical texts.  Winckler's initial
interpretations were overbroad and proposed a vastly more sophisticated
astronomy for the Babylonians than they actually possessed in the year 2000 BC.
Now to be fair to Winckler, he was no slouch.  He is better known for being the
first to decipher the Code of Hammurabi after it was discovered in 1901, as
well as the lesser known, but equally important Amarna letters after they were
discovered in the early 1890s.

The first interpretations of astronomical texts that have held up as correct
were done by a trio of Jesuit priests: Fathers Strassmeier, Epping, and Kugler.
These scholars had some astronomical knowledge which allowed them to correlate
patterns they saw in tables of characters and numbers against known
astronomical phenomena, particularly the motions of Venus, which, as we will
discuss in a later episode, held a special place in Babylonian astrology.

And by the early 1900s this work started to reveal some tantalizing clues as to
when some of these inscriptions were written.  Because in particular, one
tablet contained descriptions of the positions of Venus along with a line that
reads "year of the golden throne."  One of these Jesuits, Kugler, realized that
this was not the only reference to the year of the golden throne in ancient
Babylonian texts --- there were other, non-astronomical texts which also
referred to the year of the golden throne from the eighth year of King
Ammizaduga.  And this was not the only coincidence --- years which lasted 13
months in the astronomical texts lined up with the years lasting 13 months in
the non-astronomical texts.  And the astronomical text contained 21 years of
data on the positions of Venus --- which corresponded exactly to the 21 years
of King Ammizaduga's reign.

Kugler realized that with modern astronomy he could determine which year in the
past Venus had that particular sequence of positions on the sky.  This would
then fix the year of the golden throne to a particular date in the modern
Gregorian calendar.

So Kugler went and did this.  In one of the tablets from this year of the
golden throne, there is a statement that on the 26th of the month Arachsamma in
the sixth year, Venus disappeared behind the Sun in the west.  On the third of
the following month, it reappeared in the east.  Now as you'll recall, the
months in ancient Babylonia were not arbitrary --- the beginning of the month
always coincided with a new moon, at least approximately.  The months had 29
days, so the midpoint of Venus's disappearance was the beginning of the month
--- the new moon.  This means that on that particular date, the beginning of
the month of Kislimu in the sixth year of King Ammizaduga's reign, there was a
conjunction between the Sun, the Moon, and Venus.

And Kugler was able to figure out when this astronomical event had occurred in
the modern Gregorian calendar.  January 23rd, 1971 BC.  The establishment of
this date, then fixed a whole host of other dates from ancient Babylonia.
Using lists of Kings and the duration of their reigns, historians could
determine that King Hammurabi reigned from 1848 to 1806 BC.

Or so they thought.  Over time, issues began to crop up with this dating ---
the average reign of kings would have to be fairly long in order to get it to
work, or else there would have to be unknown gaps in the chronology.  And more
worrisome, later on records of lunar and solar eclipses were discovered that
did not seem to correspond to any times that they could have been observed
based on known astronomical data.

The trouble is that astronomical phenomena are periodic.  Father Kugler used a
conjunction of Venus with the Sun and Moon to determine the date of the sixth
year of King Ammizaduga's reign.  But these conjunctions occur every 56 or 64
years.  So with astronomical data you can determine the precise date that this
event occurred, but only if you already know when it happened to within a
half-century.

Today most historians believe that this event occurred in 1638 BC, not 1971 BC.
But it is still not known for certain.  Archaeologists speak of a Long, Middle,
and Short chronology, as well as more speculative ultra-long and ultra-short
chronologies, that each take a different date for this particular conjunction.
And there is evidence for and against each of these chronologies.  The general
consensus is that Middle Chronology is most likely to be correct --- if you
look up King Hammurabi on Wikipedia or read about him in a book, the date that
they provide will mostly likely be from the Middle Chronology.  This matches
several other non-astronomical records like king lists and dendrochronology
best.  But there are also smaller camps of scholars who favor the short
chronology, which puts the beginning of Hammurabi's reign 64 years later in
1728 BC, as it seems to better match other astronomical observations like lunar
eclipse records, though not *all* lunar eclipse records.  And some have even
favored the ultra-short chronology which puts the reign of Hammurabi almost a
century after the generally accepted Middle Chronology, at 1696 BC since it
seems to match the astronomical records best of all, but implies that there are
major issues with the other dating techniques.  At the very least, we can see
that arriving at absolute dates in archaeology is a hard problem.  And we will
see in more detail in future episodes that this problem of measuring the ages
of things in the universe, is not limited to archaeology --- astronomers have
been wrestling with this problem, with perhaps even less evidence to go on than
archaeologists, for a long time.

Well that is all for this month.  In the next episode, we will return to the
astronomy of Babylonia and discuss the place of Venus and the other planets in
Babylonian astrology, and begin to look at the development of mathematical
astronomy with the Babylonian theory of lunar eclipses.  Thank you for
listening, and until the next full moon, good night and clear skies.
