---
categories: episode
date: '2021-12-20'
description: After the Median invasion, the Ionian philosopher Xenophanes, a student
  of the Anaximander, was forced to flee to Elea in Magna Graecia and brought the
  philosophy of the Ionians to the Eleans. His student, Parmenides, then founded the Eleatic
  School which was skeptical of the senses, and argued that despite its appearance
  to the contrary, the Earth was round. Parmenides's student, Zeno, in turn developed
  his famous paradoxes to prove his teacher's assertion that motion was an illusion.
keywords:
- astronomy
- history
- greece
- philosophy
layout: episode
number: 12
title: The Eleatic School & the Way of Truthiness
---

## Transcript

Good evening, and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon.  My
name is Joe Antognini.

Before we begin I wanted to mention that if any of you dear listeners are going
to be at the winter meeting of the American Astronomical Society coming up in
January 2022 in Salt Lake City, you can hear me live, although I will not be
talking much about the history of astronomy.  I will be on a panel during the
NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship session to provide what
advice I can about getting a permanent job inside or outside astronomy.  As I
have never had a permanent job inside astronomy, my advice will mostly be
focused on getting a permanent job outside astronomy, specifically in tech,
machine learning, data science, that sort of thing.  If that is something you
would enjoy, I hope you will attend.  I suspect we will all learn something.

Well, on to the show.  Our last episode on Pythagoras and the Pythagoreans, or
as Aristotle called them, the so-called Pythagoreans was a little divergent
from the overall chronological narrative I've been developing as we've learned
about the astronomy of ancient Greece.  Pythagoras himself was contemporaneous
with some of the philosophers of the Ionian School, in particular Anaximenes,
who came after Anaximander and before Heraclitus.  But the Pythagorean School
persisted for several centuries, and thanks to the secrecy of the school, it is
very difficult to determine when exactly different ideas came about.  So most
of our knowledge of the astronomy of the Pythagorean school comes to us through
an author named Philolaus, who was active about a century after Pythagoras.

So now we are going to have to turn back the clock somewhat and revisit Greek
philosophy around the time of Pythagoras once again.  The episode on the
Pythagoreans was also something of a digression from the main thread of Greek
astronomy because the Pythagoreans really did stand apart from the other Greek
philosophical schools.  They were, as I tried to emphasize, highly secretive,
and in many ways almost cult-like relative to other philosophical schools of
the day.  Of course, ancient philosophy was very different than modern-day
philosophy in that there was a much stronger emphasis on how to live properly
--- what constituted a good life, well lived?  Many modern philosophers regard
this as being more the domain of self-help books than serious philosophy which
is interested more in thorny questions about the nature of consciousness,
language, ethics, and so forth.  So, while we don't see many contemporary
philosophers providing their students with extensive instructions as to how
they ought to live their lives, the ancient philosophers felt no such
compunction.  Nevertheless, even relative to that standard, the Pythagoreans
certainly took it to another level.

But in this episode we will turn towards a school that was more in line with
the typical philosophical schools of ancient Greece, the Eleatic School, so
named because its two most notable members, Parmenides and Zeno, were both from
the town of Elea in southern Italy, or, as it was known at the time, Magna
Graecia.  Now, as with the Ionian School, the name "the Eleatic School" was not
a formal kind of school and is just a label that historians of philosophy have
slapped on after the fact to try to group together some philosophers from a
similar part of the world who were interested in similar questions.  By
contrast the Academy of Plato and the Lyceum of Aristotle developed into more
formal institutions whose purpose was to provide a forum for philosophical
discourse, both by lectures from senior members, and dialogues between members.
But we are not there yet.  At this point in Greek intellectual life, philosophy
was a more informal affair, with philosophers attracting a group of students
who would learn what they could at the feet of the master.

Now, I mentioned that the two most well known of the Eleatics were Parmenides
and Zeno.  But we will start with another philosopher who is closely associated
with the Eleatics and had a pronounced influence on them, but is not always
included in the group --- this is a philosopher by the name of Xenophanes.

Xenophanes was almost exactly contemporaneous with Pythagoras, both were born
around 570 BC, but Xenophanes lived about a decade longer than Pythagoras,
dying around the age of 90, sometime between 480 and 475 BC.  Xenophanes forms
the point of connection between the earlier Ionian School and the later Eleatic
School.  Xenophanes was born in the city of Colophon in Ionia, which was just a
little bit north of Miletus, just a few days travel.  Like Miletus, Colophon
was a wealthy town, and in those days was considered the literary capital of
Ionia.  In his youth he seems to have moved to Miletus and become a student of
the great astronomer Anaximander, whom we talked about in Episode 9 on the
Ionian School.  But Anaximander died when Xenophanes was 24 years old, and the
following year, 545 BC, was the year of the Median invasion of Ionia and
Xenophanes was forced to flee his home and he never returned.  Heraclitus
writes that from that point on, the next 67 years "tossed his care-worn soul up
and down the land of Hellas."

Herodotus has an account of the Median invasion and the subsequent migration
that it precipitated.  The invasion was led by the Median general Harpagus.
Now, Harpagus played a crucial role in the fall of the Median empire and the
rise of the Persian empire.  Now, you may remember a few episodes back to the
Battle of the Eclipse, in which there was a total solar eclipse, supposedly
predicted by Thales, that occurred during a battle between the Medians and the
Lydians.  These hostilities had been brought about because the Scythians had
killed a Median boy and fed him to the Median king Cyaxares.

Well, a little bit after this battle, Cyaxares died and was succeeded by his
son, King Astyages.  Herodotus then tells a story about King Astyages that is
somewhat reminiscent of the tale of Perseus's birth.  According to the story,
King Astyages dreams that his daughter will bear a son who will destroy his
empire.  Naturally, after his daughter bears a son, Cyrus, who later becomes
known to history as Cyrus the Great, which maybe foreshadows where this story
will go, King Astyages orders his top general, Harpagus, to kill the child.
But Harpagus recognized that the child was royalty, and did not wish to bring
the wrath of the gods upon himself by killing a royal child, so he disobeyed
his orders and found a shepherd whose wife had just given birth to a stillborn
child.  So he swapped the infant Cyrus with the stillborn child and presented
the shepherd's stillborn child to King Astyages to prove that he had killed
Cyrus, and in reality Cyrus was raised by the shepherd.

Now, Herodotus does not make clear how exactly this happens, but ten years
later, the boy Cyrus was playing king of the hill, apparently just as much a
game in the ancient world as it is today, and was discovered, somehow, to be
the grandson of the king.  When King Astyages learns of this, he, naturally, is
not pleased.  To punish Harpagus for disobeying his orders he prepares a
banquet for Harpagus, kills Harpagus's son, and then serves the son as the main
course of the feast.  So this is the second time that a cannibal feast shows up
in the ancient Greek history of Media.  And, in fact, these are not the only
ones, yet another cannibal feast shows up in the myth of Thyestes.  So, given
these parallels, these details from Herodotus, who after all, was as much
interested in spinning a good yarn as capturing accurate history, might be
taken with a grain of salt.  Well, in this particular story, the general
Harpagus collects the remains of his son from the plates to be buried.  King
Astyages then has the question of what he should do about his still-living
grandson Cyrus.  So he consults his magi who tell him that because the child
was discovered while playing king of the hill, he had already fulfilled the
prophecy by becoming a king, so the child was now of no threat.

Harpagus, as you might imagine, is none too thrilled with King Astyages after
he killed his son and cooked him for a feast.  So while he remains in the
court, he secretly starts to plot against the king, turning the favor of nobles
against him and building his relationship with Cyrus.  When Cyrus is old
enough, Harpagus sends a message to Cyrus in the belly of a rabbit to encourage
him to revolt against the king.  Cyrus builds an army and attacks King
Astyages, so King Astyages commands Harpagus to fend off the attack and destroy
the upstart's army.  But in the battlefield, Harpagus defects, and orders his
soldiers to join with the soldiers of Cyrus and kill the king.

From this betrayal, the Median Empire fell, fulfilling the prophecy, and the
first Persian Empire, or the Achaemenid Empire, began.  As you might recall, I
discussed some of the later exploits of Cyrus at some length.  After his
conquest of the Median Empire he later conquered the Neo-Babylonian Empire and
is generally very favorably received in the Hebrew Bible because after the
destruction of the Neo-Babylonian Empire he restores the Israelites to their
land, ending the Babylonian Exile.

But, as this long-winded story concerns the Greek philosopher Xenophanes, after
Cyrus had defeated his grandfather and destroyed the Median Empire, but before
he conquered the Neo-Babylonian Empire, he continued to push west into the
Lydian empire, which he also conquered.  Now, Lydia was just east of Ionia,
basically encompassing the western part of modern day Turkey, whereas Ionia lay
just along the western coast and some of the nearby islands.  So naturally
after conquering Lydia, Cyrus continued to push right to the coast into Ionia
and attacked the city of Phocaea, which was very close to Colophon,
Xenophanes's native city.  The city of Phocaea was well defended, but did not
have the resources to fight back against the enormous armies of Cyrus the
Great, so the city was put under siege.  Nevertheless, Phocaea was on the coast
and Cyrus had no control over the seas.  So the inhabitants of the city vowed
to abandon the city and flee west.  They traveled in some 60 boats to the
island of Chios a few miles off the coast and beseeched the inhabitants to
allow them to purchase one of their uninhabited islands.  The inhabitants of
Chios refused, however, so after a time the Phocaeans returned to their city.
But by this point Cyrus had already plundered the city and moved on, leaving
only a small garrison which the Phocaeans were able to destroy.  But here there
was division among the people.  Although they had sworn an oath to stay
together as a people, almost half of them preferred to stay in their home city,
but the other half felt that they were on borrowed time, and it was only a
matter of time before Cyrus returned to conquer their city once again.  So,
based on an omen, half of the residents sailed west to the island of Corsica,
and then, after treating their neighbors poorly, departed again for Magna
Graecia where they founded the city of Elea.

So it may well have been the case that through this migration, Xenophanes
traveled from Ionia to Elea.  In fact, when recounting this story about the
exile of the Phocaeans, Herodotus may have had Xenophanes in mind.  At any
rate, the main consequence of this event was that, although it permanently
exiled Xenophanes, it ultimately brought the Ionian philosophical tradition to
the inhabitants of Elea, which later developed into the Eleatic School.

While this might be some small consolation for Xenophanes, it was clear that he
missed his native land.  Towards the end of his life, at the age of 92,
Xenophanes penned a poem, a fragment of which has survived:

> Sixty-seven years it is now that the burden of life \
> I am dragging to and fro through the regions of Greece. \
> Counting the years from the day of my birth, I was then twenty-five \
> --- If I still correctly remember \
> \
> This is the stuff one best talks about by the fire in winter, \
> Comfortably inclined, sipping sweet wine and nibbling some nuts: \
> 'Tell me, who are you, my friend, and where do you come from? \
> How old are you, my dear, and what was your age \
> At the time of the Median invasion?

Well, as for the philosophy itself that Xenophanes brought to Elea, this, too,
he wrote in verse.  Some of it has survived, but only in fragments.  His
principal interests are what we today might call theology and epistemology.  He
is interested in the nature of the god --- and, to be clear, he is interested
in the nature of god, *singular* --- and he is interested in the nature of
knowledge.  What does man know, how does man know it, what can man hope to
know?

The theology of Xenophanes is really quite radical for its time and place.  It
sounds almost like it could have been written by the prophet Jeremiah.
Xenophanes completely breaks from the polytheistic tradition of ancient Greece.
Like any educated Greek he was intimately familiar with the poems and the
implicit theology of the bards Hesiod and Homer.  But he rejects this picture
of divinity.  After all, the gods and goddesses of the Greek pantheon are
remarkably human.  They are adulterers, they harbor jealousies, steal, and lie.
The only reason they're not killing each other is because they are immortal.
Xenophanes attempted to bring an element of rationality into the religion of
his day, but found that he could not reconcile any sort of rationality with the
myths of ancient Greece, and as such they had to be rejected.

Instead he argued that the gods and goddesses depicted by Hesiod and Homer were
simply tales about humans who had superhuman powers.  He writes

> The Aethiopians say that their gods are flat-nosed and black \
> While the Thracians say that theirs have blue eyes and red hair. \
> Yet if cattle or horses or lions had hands and could draw \
> And could sculpt like men, then the horses would draw their gods \
> Like horses, and cattle like cattle, and each would then shape \
> Bodies of gods in the likeness, each kind, of its own.

To Xenophanes, the divine had to transcend all this, and to him the only way
this could happen was if there was a single true, omnipotent God without form
that encompassed all things.  He writes:

> One God alone among gods and alone among men is the greatest. \
> Neither in mind nor in body does he resemble the mortals. \
> Always in one place he remains, without ever moving. \
> Nor is it fitting for him to wander now hereto now thereto. \
> Effortless over All he reigns by mere thought and intention. \
> All of him is sight all is knowledge; and all is hearing.

This sounds like it could have been written by one of the prophets of Israel or
the early Church Fathers.  It is a view of God that is more or less consistent
with the monotheism of Judeo-Christian theology, and wholly inconsistent with
ancient Greek theology.

Now, of all the pre-Socratic philosophers, Xenophanes does not have the
strongest reputation.  Later scholars thought that his Greek was somewhat
simplistic and thought that some of his ideas were absurd, particularly with
regard to his astronomy which we'll talk about momentarily.  But Xenophanes's
rejection of the very anthropomorphic, highly dramatic polytheism of his
culture in favor of this abstracted monotheism should place him as one of the
most original thinkers of all times.  Although most westerners today regard
monotheism as a fairly natural idea --- almost everyone in the West today
believes in either one God or none at all --- it seems to be an exceedingly
non-intuitive concept.  It has rarely developed in human civilization.
Essentially the only reason that the ancient Israelites were a civilization of
any note was that, alone among civilizations, they whole-heartedly embraced
monotheism --- the idea that not only was their national god more powerful than
the gods of their neighbors --- which, to be sure, was likely the original
conception --- but that those other gods did not even exist.  Without this idea
the ancient Israelites today would probably be just as well remembered as the
Canaanites, Kushites, Hittites, and all the other "-ites" that populated the
land of the ancient Near East.  But their unique idea of monotheism radically
separated them from their neighbors --- a separation which their texts make
clear that they were very keen to retain --- and allowed them to maintain a
distinct identity to the present day, whereas the rest of these ethnic groups
melded with each other and faded away as over time new ethnic identities
gradually developed.  But even for the ancient Israelites, this idea did not
come to them overnight.  Based on the dates at which various texts of the
Hebrew Bible were written it is clear, too, that this idea developed over
centuries, with the God of Israel initially being conceived of as a
conglomeration of the local gods of various tribes within Israel, later
becoming the most powerful of the Gods, still later becoming the *only* God,
and finally, abstracting away the anthropomorphic representations.  But here
Xenophanes is independently coming up with it.

As I mentioned Xenophanes is also interested in epistemology, and here he
presents another profound idea, seemingly for the first time.  He writes:

> But as for certain truth, no man has known it \
> Nor will he know it; neither of the gods \
> Nor yet of all the things of which I speak. \
> And even if by chance he were to utter \
> The perfect truth, he would himself not know it; \
> For all is but a woven web of guesses.

The crucial idea here is the distinction between an objective truth, which
Xenophanes believes exists, and our certainty of having that truth.  So he
believes that an objective truth exists.  But he does not believe that we can
have certainty that what we believe is the truth.  Even if it so happens that
what we believe is true, we cannot *know* that it is true.  For us humans there
is always some uncertainty.  But Xenophanes is not an epistemological
pessimist.  He writes in another fragment:

> The gods did not reveal, from the beginning, \
> All things to the mortals; but in the course of time, \
> Through seeking they may get to know things better.

So, while we can never have objective truth, we can proceed to iteratively
improve our knowledge and draw ever closer to that objective truth.  The
philosopher of science Karl Popper, who is best known for his idea that the
basis of science is falsification --- theories are scientific if they make
predictions which can in principle be falsified by some experiment --- (he also
made these translations, incidentally), Popper argued that in the epistemology
of Xenophanes we have the foundation for Western science.  In fact, Popper
makes quite a forceful argument for the importance of the pre-Socratic
philosophers generally.  He speculates that this may have begun with
Xenophanes's teacher Anaximander who perhaps encouraged Xenophanes not to
accept his own ideas uncritically, but to think about them, challenge them,
find fault with them, and propose his own.  This process of critical evaluation
and proposing new ideas to remedy the defects of former ideas is at the heart
of the scientific process, far more so than experimentation because
experimentation must always be done with an aim toward evaluating some theory.
In practice it is not done aimlessly, according to Popper it's done to test the
predictions and consequences of different theories.  This culture of vigorous
debate of competing ideas developed in the Ionian School, transferred to the
Eleatic School, and ultimately became a feature generally of the philosophy of
ancient Greece, and then Western civilization more broadly.  This was a feature
which really made it unique relative to other cultures.  Other cultures
certainly had philosophers and what we might call philosophical schools where
students learned from the master.  But the purpose of the school was to
transmit the ideas of the master down through the generations more or less
unchanged.  Members of different schools might debate with each other, but
within a school, the philosophy was set by the master and the job of the
students was to interpret the wisdom of the master.  In this regard, the
Pythagorean school was more like the sort of philosophical schools that existed
outside of ancient Greece.  The Pythagoreans, particularly the Acousmatics,
were very interested in preserving the ideas of the master Pythagoras.  But the
culture of debate and the deluge of original ideas introduced through the
Ionian and Eleatic Schools was why centuries and even millennia later scholars
looked to ancient Greece and saw that something unique in the development of
intellectual life had occurred.

Okay, so what of the astronomy of Xenophanes?  Here there are two
interpretations --- one is a fairly straightforward reading of his cosmology as
it is transmitted by Aristotle and Aëtius.  The other is a more unorthodox
reading from Karl Popper, although, I must admit, I personally find it more
persuasive.  Now, in the standard telling of Xenophanes's cosmology, Xenophanes
holds that the Earth is essentially infinite in extent.  It is flat and extends
in all directions off to infinity.  Not only that, the Earth also extends
downwards to infinity as well.  Above the Earth, the atmosphere extends up
infinitely.  Now, because the Earth extends infinitely downwards, there is no
need to explain why the Earth stays up.  As Aristotle is wont to do, he
ridicules this explanation, saying that Xenophanes did it "to save himself the
trouble of looking for a reason."

Now, this cosmology on its own is plausible enough.  But things start to get
strange when you have to explain how day and night work.  Because we clearly
see the Sun rise each morning and set each evening, which seems to be tension
with the idea that the Earth is infinite in extent.  So Xenophanes's
explanation here is that there is an infinite procession of Suns, Moons, and
stars.  Each Sun simply moves in a line from east to west.  From our
perspective here on Earth it just appears that the Sun is rising and setting as
it gets nearer to us and then further away.  Now it seems as though the fact
that the pattern of the stars is identical from night to night even though it's
a completely different set of objects is quite a remarkable fact, but it's the
necessary consequence of his theory.  In addition to this, Xenophanes claims
that the Sun, Moon, and stars, are all balls of gas set alight, though the Moon
is compressed air, which gives it its silvery color.  At least as regards the
Sun and the stars, this is not so far off from the truth.

So, that is the straightforward interpretation of Xenophanes's cosmology.  The
Earth is flat and infinite in extent, both to the sides and down.  But some
have argued that this was a hatchet job.  The physician Galen who later wrote
during the second century AD accused other philosophers of misrepresenting
Xenophanes, saying, "In a malicious and slanderous way some commentators on
Xenophanes have lied about him....  For nowhere can Xenophanes be found to have
said anything like that."  Galen almost certainly had texts from Xenophanes
that have today been lost, so he would have been in a better position to
compare the representation that other philosophers made of Xenophanes, perhaps
Aristotle among them, to the writings of Xenophanes themselves.

Karl Popper, an enthusiastic fan of Xenophanes, and the Eleatics and
pre-Socratics more generally, felt that this usual interpretation of the
cosmology of Xenophanes was far too simplistic for a mind of his subtlety.  An
alternative interpretation is that Xenophanes's cosmology is really no
different from that of his teacher Anaximander.  You may remember that
Anaximander argued that the world was a cylinder floating in a void and did not
move because it was equally distant from all things.  And in Anaximander's
metaphysics, the *arche*, the essential matter that composed all things, was
what he called the apeiron, the Infinite.  This word is actually the first
technical word that appears in the history of natural philosophy --- a word
that was invented specifically to describe a new physical concept.  Well, when
Xenophanes says that the Earth extends downward to infinity, he is using this
same word, apeiron.  So it could equally well be read that the Earth extends
downward to the apeiron.  So another, perhaps more reasonable interpretation of
Xenophanes's cosmology is that the Earth is a cylinder, just as in the
cosmology of Anaximander, but that this cylinder is floating not in a void, but
is floating in the apeiron.  So, the Earth extends downward to this apeiron and
to the sides is surrounded by apeiron, but this does not mean that the Earth
itself is infinite in extent.  Now, in this reading, we must also accept that
the attribution to Xenophanes of this idea of an infinite procession of Suns,
Moons, and stars was completely fabricated by later authors, who, perhaps were
attempting to reconcile the idea of an Earth infinite in extent with the
observational fact that the Sun rises in the east every day.

The last thing I will say about Xenophanes is with regard to his cosmogony,
which is also unique in that it is the first to be backed up with some
observational evidence.  In some representations, Xenophanes holds that the
arche, the essential substance of all things, was Earth, or at least mud.  This
then rounds out the four classical elements.  Thales had water, Anaximenes had
air, Heraclitus had fire, and now Xenophanes has Earth.  In the beginning all
things were a sort of mud, and from this dry Earth and water separated.  Unlike
the cosmogonies of other ancient Greek philosophers, Xenophanes supported his
idea with the observation that sea shells could be found far inland, up in
mountains and in quarries.  To him, this provided evidence that at one time
water and Earth must have been mixed together more thoroughly than they are
today.

Well, there is more I could say about Xenophanes.  Aëtius, for example, claims
that Xenophanes described a solar eclipse that lasted a full month.  The most
charitable interpretation of this statement is that Aëtius may have been
misunderstanding a description of the fact that if you're within the Arctic
Circle the Sun does not rise near the winter solstice, but this also
contradicts either interpretation of Xenophanes's cosmology since this idea
only makes sense if the Earth is spherical.  But Xenophanes lived a very long
time and maybe in his old age was influenced by his student Parmenides to adopt
the idea of a spherical Earth.  At any rate it's hard to say.

But we should move on to the philosopher who is said to have founded the
Eleatic School: Parmenides.  As I just mentioned Parmenides was a student of
Xenophanes, or at least was likely to have been a student.  One of the strange
things about Parmenides is that there is a very wide discrepancy as to when he
lived.  This is, of course, par for the course for the earlier figures.  We
don't even know if Homer was a real person, much less when he lived.  But by
the time we get to the fifth century BC, we have enough sources and
cross-references that it's generally possible to date individuals to within a
few years or so.

Now, Plato says that Parmenides and Zeno visited Athens together when
Parmenides was 65 years old and Zeno was 40 years old and there they conversed
with Socrates, who was very young at the time.  If we assume that this means
that Socrates was roughly 20 years old, this would mean that Parmenides was
born around 515 BC.  However, Diogenes Laërtius writes that Parmenides was at
the height of his influence in the year 505 BC.  If he was born in 515 BC as
implied by Plato, this would mean that Parmenides was at the height of his
philosophical powers at 10 years of age.  Now, child prodigies exist in music,
mathematics, and chess, but they don't exist in philosophy.  More plausibly, if
we assume that Parmenides was at the height of his influence around age 40,
this would put his birth in the year 540 BC, about 25 years earlier than we
would get from Plato.  So, who are we to believe, Plato or Diogenes Laërtius?
Now, on its face this is kind of a ludicrous question.  One the one hand we
have perhaps the greatest philosophers who ever lived, a man of such staggering
intellectual influence that Alfred North Whitehead wrote that "all philosophy
is footnotes to Plato."  And on the other hand we have Diogenes Laërtius, who,
I have tried to repeatedly emphasize, was a completely uncritical source and
frequently didn't have any idea what he was talking about.  That said, however,
while Diogenes Laërtius is happy to pass on dubious information because it
tells a good story, he's not really doing that in this case.  He's just
conveying the year in which Parmenides was most active, something he presumably
would have known given what was known at the time.  And Plato, while he is a
thinker of immense depth, was also known to bend the details in service of an
anecdote.  In this case his aim was not to convey the facts about when
Parmenides lived, but may have just been trying to contrive a situation in
which he could describe a dialog between Socrates and Parmenides to make a
philosophical point contrasting their two philosophies.  So perhaps,
incredibly, we might be more inclined to believe Diogenes Laërtius over Plato
in this one instance.

Like Xenophanes, Parmenides also wrote a philosophical text and, like
Xenophanes, he did so in verse.  Fortunately, more of this work has survived
than the fragments of Xenophanes.  His principle work is today given the title
*On Nature*, and it's estimated that what we have of it represents about a
quarter of the complete text.

Parmenides was less interested in theology than Xenophanes, but was every bit
as interested in epistemology.  Although *On Nature* describes some astronomy,
the principal problem the work is wrestling with is one of epistemology.  The
work is a little bit strange, almost mystical.  It describes a revelation that
Parmenides received from a goddess, who is unnamed but usually understood to be
Dike, the goddess of justice.  In a story that is later echoed in Plato's Myth
of Er, which I'll discuss in a future episode, Parmenides is transported by
chariot to a liminal space where night meets day and here is given a revelation
as to the truth of all things.  But the revelation of the goddess comes in two
parts.  First she describes what Parmenides calls the Way of Truth, which is
the way things actually are.  Then afterwards, she describes what is usually
translated as the Way of Opinion, which is the way things appear to be, but are
not.  This on its own is weird.  You, a philosopher, are transported to this
mysterious realm and then a goddess tells you the true nature of all things,
the Way of Truth --- this all sounds good so far!  But then, after telling you
the truth of all things, the goddess goes on to tell you a bunch of lies.
What's the point of that?  But after reading the Way of Truth, it becomes
somewhat clearer why the goddess has done this, because the Way of Truth, as
some commentators have described it, appears to be a work of insanity.  The Way
of Opinion is, while still a little weird, definitely more comprehensible than
the Way of Truth.

The Way of Truth is, in essence, this.  All things are one.  The world is
complete, full, a solid, unchanging, spherical mass.  Motion is impossible,
there are no gaps between anything.  The entire universe is completely static.
In this way, Parmenides is perhaps the purest of the monists.  While Thales
thought that fundamentally all things had their origin in water, and Anaximenes
believed that all things had their origin in air, and Heraclitus fire,
Parmenides does not believe that all things have their origin in a single
substance.  He believes that all things simply *are* a single substance --- and
any appearance to the contrary is an illusion.

Now why does he take this viewpoint?  In Parmenides's poem, the goddess says:

> Listen!  And carry away my message when you have grasped it!\
> Note the only two ways of inquiry that can be thought of:\
> One is the way that *it is*; and that *non-being* cannot be *being*\
> That is the path of Persuasion, Truth's handmaid; now to the other!\
> this path is that *it is not*; and that *it* may *not* be *being*.\ 
> That path --- take it from me! --- is a path that just cannot be thought of.\
> For you can't know what is *not*: it can't be done; nor can you say it.

Now, the essential message might be lost in the poetry here, but what's going
on is that Parmenides is providing the beginnings of a rational defense of his
preposterous idea.  The underlying assumption behind this mode of argument is
that the senses are deceptive.  We cannot trust what we believe to be true from
our senses.  Instead we must fall back on rational deduction, the path of
persuasion.  Only through rational deduction can we be assured that we are
arriving upon real, universal truths.  In this way, Parmenides could well be
considered a gnostic philosopher.  Although gnosticism is most closely
identified with the Christian heresy of the first few centuries AD, the gnostic
impulse powerful in human thought and pops up across space and time in human
culture.  The essential idea behind gnostic thought is that this world is a
sort of prison.  Our souls are constantly deceived by our bodies and the world
that is apparently around us, and our goal is, through hidden knowledge, to
escape the confines of our bodies in this world of shadows, to the true,
transcendent reality beyond.  In its development by Gnostic Christians, the
world had been created not by God the Father as in Orthodox Christianity, but
by a lesser, malevolent deity called the demiurge.  But the figure of Jesus
Christ had come into this world to impart this secret knowledge to some of his
disciples so that they could escape from this world into the transcendent world
created by God the Father.  Perhaps the best cinematic allegory of gnosticism
is the movie *The Matrix*, in which the protagonist, Neo, learns that the world
around him is a simulation created by a malevolent figure called the Architect,
and through the hidden knowledge given to him through the red pill by the
Christ figure Morpheus, he can escape the false reality into the real one.

Of all the philosophers in the Western tradition, Parmenides comes closest to
gnosticism, though much later on Kant, and the existentialists, Heidegger in
particular, also have gnostic elements.

Well, if we cannot rely on our senses to arrive at the truth, we have to rely
on rational deduction.  And here Parmenides's argument is essentially this.
Only that which is, is.  That which is not, is not.  The void --- the absence
of being --- therefore is not.  If there is no void, then there are no spaces
between things.  The world is full, the world is a block.  Therefore motion is
impossible.

Now, this is a counter-intuitive conclusion because we clearly see around
ourselves that things move.  But we must always remember that our senses are
deceiving us --- they cannot be trusted.  We have logically proved that motion
is impossible --- who are you going to believe, Parmenides, or your lying eyes?

This is, understandably, not especially satisfying.  If the world is a static,
unchanging block, there is nothing to do about describing it.  Yet we demand
explanations for what we see.  So Parmenides grudgingly provides us with a
second way of understanding the world.  This cannot be the truth --- we already
proved what the truth was, that all is one and nothing moves.  But, it is a way
of understanding the world, which, while wrong, is more comprehensible to us
mere mortals and is at least *less wrong* than other ways of understanding the
world.  This is the Way of Opinion.  The Greek word here is "doxa".  And while
"opinion" is one translation for it, another connotation for this word that is
used is "verisimilitude".  Perhaps a more modern translation might be
"truthiness."  So we have the Way of Truth, which is not really comprehensible
to us mere mortals, and we are left instead with the Way of Truthiness.  Not
true strictly speaking, but given what we can know, it has the feel of truth
about it.

So, what is in the Way of Opinion, or the Way of Truthiness?  Unfortunately not
much of this part of the poem survives, so we have to go off of the few
fragments that do and references in other texts.  But it seems as though this
is where Parmenides described his cosmology, at least the false cosmology as it
appears to us humans.

The overall structure of his cosmology is very similar to Anaximander's.  You
may recall that Anaximander had what I called his "wheel theory."  In this
theory, the Earth was at the center of the Universe.  The Sun and Moon were not
isolated spots on the sky, but it was sort of like there was a wheel centered
on the Earth.  We on the Earth were at the center of the wheel, looking out
along the spokes to the rim on the sky.  This wheel was filled with a fiery
air, but had a circular vent in one spot, so we only saw the Sun or Moon in one
spot on the sky --- the rest of the wheel was apparently invisible.  Now this
is kind of an unintuitive theory, and when I described this theory in Episode
10 I didn't do much in the way of motivating it.  Now, to be clear, nothing in
the surviving literature motivates this theory, so we don't really know why
Anaximander came up with this idea, but taking into consideration the rest of
his cosmology, we can speculate as to the reason.  You may recall that in the
episode about the Ionian School I spent a fair amount of time harping on the
importance of Anaximander's idea of symmetry.  He argued that the Earth was
suspended in the middle of the Universe and didn't move because it was
equally distant from all things and so could not arbitrarily choose some
direction in which to move.  But, of course, if the Sun and Moon were really
discrete bodies, this would not be true.  Sometimes the Moon is on one side of
the Earth and sometimes on the other, and so is the Sun.  So the presence of
these two bodies would break the symmetry that Anaximander is relying on and
could cause the Earth to move.  So a plausible motivation for his wheel theory
is that if the Sun and Moon weren't just discrete bodies, but instead were
extended across the entire sky, but were just invisible everywhere except one
spot, we would restore the symmetry that his theory relied on.  The Earth would
be equally distant from every part of the Sun's wheel and Moon's wheel and
would be stationary in the center of the Universe.

Well, Parmenides adopted an essentially identical theory, except that he used
the word "wreaths" instead of "wheels."  Incidentally, the similarity of
Parmenides's wreath theory to Anaximander's wheel theory could perhaps be taken
as evidence for the more unorthodox interpretation of Xenophanes's cosmology
that I described earlier.  Since Parmenides studied from Xenophanes and
Xenophanes studied from Anaximander and both Parmenides and Anaximander had
substantially similar cosmologies, it should perhaps be expected that this was
also the cosmology of Xenophanes, the philosopher between those two.  Now,
Parmenides distinguished between three kinds of wreaths.  Some wreaths were
filled with fire, others were filled with condensed matter, and a third kind
was filled with a mixture of the two.  

As to what kinds of wreaths correspond to which celestial bodies, things get
somewhat unclear.  But a plausible interpretation of the fragments we have is
that there essentially five distinct shells.  In the center of the Universe, of
course, is the Earth, which is made of condensed matter.  Above it is the
atmosphere, which is made of the fiery material.  Beyond the atmosphere there
are the wreaths corresponding to the different celestial bodies, the Sun, Moon,
planets, Milky Way, and stars.  These wreaths have a different proportion of
fire to condensed matter which is why the Sun, Moon, and stars appear so
different.  Then beyond these wreaths, there is another fiery shell, and
immediately beyond that is a final shell of condensed matter which is called
Outer Olympos and represents the edge of the Universe.

The key in interpreting the texts that describe this cosmology is a preposition
that can apparently be translated either as around or under.  So in one reading
we have a fiery shell around a shell made of condensed matter, and this is
taken to be the atmosphere around the Earth.  But in an alternative reading,
this fiery shell is *under* the Earth, in which case it may have been added to
explain volcanoes and hot springs.

Now I passed over an important detail as I was describing this cosmology, but
one feature of his cosmology was that he held the Earth to be spherical.  From
what we know, Parmenides probably had no observational reason to suppose that
the Earth has this shape, but probably arrived at it through its symmetry.
After all Anaximander's cosmology is very elegant with the Earth suspended in
the center of the Universe through its equidistant position with respect to the
circular hoops of the other bodies of the universe.  But a wart on this theory
is that in this perfectly symmetric system, the actual shape of the Earth
itself is a cylinder, which is far from being perfectly symmetric.  By
substituting a sphere for a cylinder, Parmenides removed the most asymmetric
component of the theory.

The fact that the Earth appears flat to us standing on it and yet is in reality
round --- or at least in the reality of Parmenides's Way of Truthiness --- is
really quite in keeping with his overall epistemology, that our senses deceive
us and are not to be trusted.  Our eyes tell us the world is flat, but it is
not so.

Now, Parmenides is not the only ancient astronomer to be credited with being
the first to claim that the Earth is round.  Some sources also claim that
Pythagoras was the first to make this discovery.  But given how foundational
this idea is to all of astronomy, it speaks to Parmenides's standing as an
astronomer that he was at least considered to be a contender in having first
claim to the idea.  And this isn't the only foundational astronomical discovery
that is disputed, but among which some sources credit to Parmenides.  Some
sources claim that he was the first to recognize that the morning star and
evening star are the same object, namely Venus.  And finally Aëtius says that
Parmenides was the first to recognize that the phases of the Moon are due to
the changing reflection of light from the Sun on the Moon.

Now, on the one hand this is an idea that is entirely in keeping with the
philosophy of Parmenides.  We see with our eyes the Moon change every night.
It waxes into a full moon, and then wanes and disappears before starting the
cycle over again.  But according to Parmenides, nothing is *really* changing.
Once again, our eyes our deceiving us.  This phenomenon is just an illusion of
light casting shadows on a sphere.  At the same time, however, this idea does
seem to contradict Parmenides's wreath idea.  In this wreath model, what we see
as the Moon is just a vent in the overall wreath that exposes us to the mixture
of fire and condensed matter within.  So there is no surface on which to cast
shadows.  Given the sources we have it's hard to reconcile these.

The last discovery of Parmenides that I'll recount is the idea of the climatic
zones of the Earth.  This is really a consequence of Parmenides's idea that the
Earth is spherical.  As a sphere, it must have a north pole and a south pole,
along with an equator and Parmenides seems to have understood that the climates
in those various locations would be very different from each other.  In
particular, he divided the globe into five zones, which we still have to this
day.  There are the two polar zones around the north and south poles also
sometimes called the frigid zones, then there are the temperate latitudes, and
in the middle are the tropics, which is also sometimes called the torrid zone.
Now, the locations where Parmenides divided the globe were probably somewhat
different than the modern day division.  In his system it seems like the
tropical zone was about twice as large as it is in the modern map.  But the
basic idea that the polar regions would be very cold and the tropics very hot
was a direct prediction of his theory that the Earth was spherical turned out
to be fundamentally correct.

Well, there is one other philosopher of the Eleatic School whom I'll talk about
--- Zeno of Elea.  Now, of all the Eleatic philosophers, Zeno is by far the
most famous.  Today most students of physics have heard of Zeno's Paradoxes,
but strictly speaking, Zeno does not really belong in a podcast about the
history of astronomy because unlike Parmenides, he did not really have anything
to say about astronomy.  However, his paradoxes were so influential on the
development of calculus and physics, which, in turn, later impacted astronomy,
that I feel like it is appropriate to spend a little time on him here.

Now you may recall from earlier when we were talking about when Parmenides
lived that Plato had told a story when Parmenides and Zeno visited Athens and
conversed with a young Socrates.  Plato tells us that at the time Parmenides
was 65 and Zeno was 40.  So if Plato's account is historical, and that's a big
if, this would put Zeno's birth at around 490 BC, though, as I mentioned, this
dating conflicts with some of the information given to us by Diogenes Laërtius,
so it may be off by as much as thirty years.

As is usually the case, Diogenes Laërtius gives us some entertaining stories
about Zenos's life, though who can say how accurate they are.  In Diogenes
Laërtius's telling, Zeno entered into a conspiracy to overthrow the tyrant of
Elea.  Unfortunately Zeno was captured and tortured to reveal the names of his
co-conspirators.  He eventually relented and told the tyrant that the
conspiracy had been organized in such a way that he did not know they names of
the other members of the conspiracy.  But he nevertheless had information that
would be useful to catch the other conspirators.  Zeno then became quiet, as
though he was losing his power of speech.  When the tyrant leaned in to hear
what secret Zeno had to tell, Zeno bit the tyrant's ear off.  In a much later
source, an author tells this story in a way reminiscent of the story of the
Pythagoreans Mylias and Timycha.  In order to prevent himself from revealing
the names of his co-conspirators, Zeno bites off his own tongue and spits it
out before the tyrant.

Well, as I mentioned, Zeno is by far best known for his paradoxes.  These
mostly come to us through Aristotle's *Physics*.  There are a number of
paradoxes, and it's probably the case that not all of them survive to today,
but three in particular are the most well known and have had the most influence
on the development of calculus and physics.  The first of these is what is
sometimes called the Stadium Paradox, or the Paradox of the Dichotomy.  The
idea is this.  Suppose that you are running from one end of a stadium to
another.  Zeno claims that this is impossible.  Because if you are going to run
from one end to the other, this means that you need to first traverse through
the halfway point.  Then when you are at the halfway point, you need to go
halfway from where you currently are to the end.  Then when you are at that
point, you still need to go through a point halfway from where you currently
are to the end.  And so on ad infinitum.  You must complete an infinite number
of steps in order to get to the end, and because this cannot be done, you can
never reach the end of the stadium.  But of course, going from one end of the
stadium to the other is an arbitrary choice.  The two points you want to go
between could equally well be arbitrarily close together.  Since you cannot go
from one point to another, all motion is impossible.

Zeno makes a similar point with another paradox, Achilles and the Tortoise.
The scenario is that Achilles, the fastest runner in the world, is in a
footrace against a tortoise.  The tortoise, however, has been given a head
start.  Zeno claims that Achilles can never catch up to the tortoise.  Because
when Achilles starts running, he must first run to the point where the tortoise
was when he first started running.  But by the time he arrives at that point,
the tortoise has advanced somewhat.  So now he must run to that somewhat more
distant point.  But by the time he gets there, he finds that the tortoise has
advanced still further.  So he must continue running until he gets to that
point, by which point the tortoise has moved still further ahead and so on.
No matter how many times this process is repeated, Achilles finds that the
tortoise is always slightly ahead of him.

The final paradox I'll mention is what is called the Arrow Paradox.  Consider
an archer who has shot an arrow through the air.  Zeno claims that the arrow is
not moving.  For consider the arrow at some instant in time.  It is simply
suspended at one location in the air.  Now consider it at some other instant in
time.  It is now suspended in that location in the air.  At any instant in
time, there is no motion, for the appearance of the arrow is identical to that
of an arrow which is not in motion.  The arrow is simply suspended motionless
at different locations in different points of time.  Somehow the motion is
occurring between instants, which by definition, are at no points in time.
Therefore motion is impossible.

Now, these paradoxes were really the first serious attempt by philosophers and
mathematicians to grapple with the concept of infinity, and it took centuries
to work them out.  It wasn't until the development of calculus in the 17th and
18th centuries AD that mathematicians started to feel like they had a
reasonable resolution to these paradoxes, and even then, problems about the
nature of infinity continued to bedevil mathematicians and logicians well into
the 20th century.  But, from the modern mathematical perspective, Zeno's
paradoxes in particular are no longer considered to be a problem.  In the case
of the Stadium Paradox, the modern mathematician simply says that although you
are passing through an infinite number of halfway points, each time you do this
takes half the time of the previous step.  So the total time it takes is the
sum of 1/2 plus 1/4 plus 1/8 and so on to infinity.  But this series converges
to the number two.  So even though there are an infinite number of terms in the
series, the sum is nevertheless finite, and there's no problem here.  The
paradox of Achilles and the Tortoise has a similar resolution.

In the case of the Paradox of the Arrow, the modern physicist would say that
the velocity of the arrow is defined to be the distance traveled by the arrow
divided by the time it takes to travel that distance in the limit that the
distance goes to zero.  In other words, it is perfectly well defined to have
two objects with the same position at some point in time, but different
velocities.

Now, this solution is not entirely satisfactory, because in Zeno's telling, we
are only allowed to consider the arrow at a single instant in time.  How can we
tell that it is moving in that particular time?  If we cannot tell that it is
moving at any particular instant of time, we cannot tell that it is moving at
any time at all, since time is composed of nothing more than a sequence of
instants.  For those listeners who have had some calculus, the question is
essentially, is it possible to have two functions, which have the same values
at all points, but different derivatives everywhere?  One way of dealing with
this problem in modern mathematics is with the concept of the surreal numbers.
The surreal numbers actually harken back to a concept that was originally
developed during the invention of calculus and later discarded as calculus
became more formalized in the 19th century.  This is the idea of the
infinitesimal.  In casual use, an infinitesimal just refers to a very small
number, but in a strictly mathematical sense, an infinitesimal has a very
specific meaning.  An infinitesimal is the smallest positive number.  In other
words, it's the next number after zero.  Now, this is not a valid concept in
the standard system of real numbers, because there is always a real number
between any two real numbers.  So if you were to pick some real number and
declare it to be the smallest possible positive number, I could come back to
you and give you that number divided by two.  That is also a positive number
and it's smaller than yours.  So the infinitesimals are not real numbers but
are an extension of the real number system.  By augmenting the real numbers
with the infinitesimals along with infinity as a well defined number in its own
right, we end up with the surreal numbers, or depending on the details of how
we do this, the hyperreals.  The picture is essentially that every real number
is flanked by a pair of infinitesimals, one infinitesimally lower and one
infinitesimally larger.  Then we can answer Zeno by defining motion to be how
the position of the arrow changes infinitesimally across an infinitesimal
amount of time.  These infinitesimal changes, are, in a loose sense, in a
different dimension that ordinary changes in time since they're not happening
across real numbers.  So, that is another way that a modern mathematician might
answer Zeno about his arrow.

These kinds of resolutions are, I think, how most scientifically minded people
who have encountered Zeno's paradoxes treat them.  Useful for the development
of calculus, but are now solved.  However, notwithstanding the useful impact
these paradoxes did in fact have on the development of calculus, this treatment
does, I believe, actually miss the underlying philosophical point that Zeno was
making.  Even if the mathematical and physical issues have been resolved, the
philosophical issues are just as open as they were in the 5th century BC.

First of all, Zeno almost certainly developed his paradoxes in defense of
Parmenides's philosophy of the Way of Truth.  Remember that Parmenides had
argued that all change that we see is an illusion.  All things are one, and all
movement is impossible.  Other philosophers had disputed this conclusion and
tried to demonstrate its absurdity through paradoxes that would emerge if no
motion occurred.  So Zeno developed a series of paradoxes of his own to show
that the concept of motion is a logical impossibility.  Although our eyes
appear to show us motion, it is necessarily an illusion.

This conclusion is not only a defence of Parmenides's philosophy of the unity
of being, but it's also a refutation of the Pythagoreans, who remember,
believed that all things were number and that from the number one proceeded all
subsequent numbers.  In the broadest terms, Zeno's paradoxes show the logical
inconsistency of moving from the one to the many.  The Stadium paradox and
Achilles and the Tortoise demonstrate the impossibility of going from many to
one --- how is it possible to compose a single quantity of an infinite number
of constituents?  And the Arrow paradox demonstrates the impossibility of going
from one to many.  We can have a single instant.  But there is no purely
logical derivation that can go from an instant to the concept of motion, which
spans a continuum of instants.  At their logical core, Zeno is essentially
expressing a tautology.  One is one.  Many is many.  Many is not one and one is
not many.  It is therefore impossible to go from one to many or from many to
one.  If the universe begins as one, it cannot become many.

One approach in handling the metaphysical implications of Zeno's paradoxes in
modern philosophy is with the concept of the supertask, developed by James
Thomson in the 1950s AD.  A supertask is an infinite series of events within a
finite period of time.  So in this sense, in the Stadium paradox, running
across a stadium is a supertask, because one must traverse an infinite number
of halfway marks in an finite period of time.  Now, Zeno, being an Eleatic
argued that such a task was impossible to complete, and therefore concluded
that the concept of motion produced a logical contradiction and was an
illusion.  Few people today, even among philosophers, who are known to believe
some wacky things, believe Zeno on this point.  But that does not mean that all
supertasks are possible.  James Thomson proposed a philosophical experiment
known now as Thomson's lamp.  The idea is that there is a lamp with a light
switch.  At the beginning of the experiment someone switches the lamp on.
After one minute, they switch the lamp off.  Then half a minute later, they
switch the lamp back on.  Then a quarter of a minute later the switch it back
off, and so on.  The lamp is switched on and off exponentially faster.  Finally
the experiment ends after two minutes.  Is the lamp on or off?  Now you might
object that such an experiment is physically impossible, no one can toggle
light switches this quickly, that it violates the laws of quantum physics or
relativity, but this misses the philosophical point.  In a philosophical
thought experiment, you have to grant the philosopher the premise of their
argument.  This is not making a point about physics, it's making a point about
metaphysics.  What would have to be true regardless of the physics of our
universe?  We can conceive of this experiment as being possible, so what would
happen if it were?  Thomson argued that even if the laws of physics in
principle permitted us to perform such a supertask, it would yield a logical
contradiction.  Thomson writes:

> It cannot be on, because I did not ever turn it on without at once turning it
> off. It cannot be off, because I did in the first place turn it on, and
> thereafter I never turned it off without at once turning it on. But the lamp
> must be either on or off. This is a contradiction.

From this Thomson concludes that such a supertask is impossible, even in
principle.  But if motion, which is apparently also a supertask, is logically
possible --- despite Zeno's objections --- then which supertasks are possible
and which supertasks are impossible?

Well, as is the danger with Zeno, we are starting to drift a little far from
astronomy.  Now, of course, no one today really believes the Way of Truth
proposed by the Eleatic philosophers, that all things are one and that the
variety of objects and changes we observe are nothing but an illusion.  But
even in the time of the ancient Greeks, this idea was regarded skeptically.
But one of the reactions against this idea led to one of the most profound
scientific ideas of all time.

Two philosophers by the names of Leucippus and Democritus looked at the logic
of Parmenides's argument that all things were one.  Remember that it went like
this: what is, is.  What is not, is not.  By definition, the void is not.
Therefore the void does not exist.  Therefore the world is a block and motion
is impossible.  Leucippus and Democritus turned this argument on its head.  The
started from the observational fact that motion does exits.  Therefore the
world is not a block.  There must be void between matter to enable motion.
Therefore, matter comes in discrete units.  Therefore, matter consists of
atoms.  So from this apparently preposterous argument from Parmenides, we
ultimately end up with atomic theory.

But, this is a tale for another full moon.  I hope you'll join me then.  Until
the next full moon, good night, and clear skies.

## Additional references

* Popper, Karl: The World of Parmenides, 1998
* Papa-Grimaldi, Alba: Why Mathematical Solutions of Zeno's Paradoxes Miss the
  Point, 1996
