---
categories: episode
date: '2022-10-09'
description: In the year 1900 a team of sea sponge divers stumbled upon a shipwreck
  from the late Hellenistic Era. Among the statues, coins, and jewellery, the salvage
  crew pulled out a small box covered in moss. Initially ignored, the contents of
  this box proved to be the most sophisticated mechanical device that survives from
  the ancient world. The Antikythera mechanism computed all the known motions of the
  heavens and its complexity was described by one scholar as "like finding a jet engine
  in King Tut's tomb."
keywords:
- astronomy
- history
- greece
layout: episode
number: 22
title: The Antikythera Mechanism & Friends
---

## Transcript

Good evening and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon.  My
name is Joe Antognini.

At the end of the last episode I promised a little break in the general
narrative I've been taking through Greek astronomy.  Generally speaking, the
last dozen episodes have been largely biographical in nature.  Starting with
Thales we've looked at the ideas and contributions of various individuals to
Greek astronomy over the centuries up until Hipparchus in the late Hellenistic
Era.  But at this point, before rounding out Greek astronomy with the work of
Ptolemy, I wanted to spend a bit of time talking about Greek instrumentation,
and in particular the remarkable device known as the Antikythera Mechanism.
So, I promised you a shorter episode on that subject.  Well, as you can see
from the show length, I have proven myself untrustworthy once more.  My
intentions were genuine, I really wanted a shorter show on different
instruments in Greek antiquity.  But as I was researching the show, I realized
I had more or less already talked about the different instruments like the
diopter and the gnomon in past episodes, so there wasn't really a lot new for
me to say.  And at the same time I started reading about the Antikythera
mechanism, and reading about it and reading about it, and I realized that I had
chosen a subject about which there was a lot more to say than I had originally
anticipated.  So there you go.  This episode will have a typical length and it
ill be exclusively on the Antikythera mechanism.  So let's get into it.

The Antikythera mechanism is undoubtedly the most sophisticated computational
device of the ancient world, and the natural place to start talking about it
is, of course, hygiene practices in 19th century Europe.  Now today, we keep
things clean with sponges, but strictly speaking, the sponges you use to clean
your dishes are not true sponges but artificial sponges.  They are made of
polyester and polyurethane usually, materials which weren't invented until the
1940s and 1950s.  So the kinds of sponges we use to clean things today didn't
exist until the mid 20th century and earlier generations had to use other
materials.

At least around the Mediterranean, a popular choice was a true sponge, that is
to say, a sea sponge, a living creature with a soft, well, spongy texture.
Sea sponges are animals, but really only barely.  Evolutionarily, they branched
off from the rest of the animals before any other kind of animal.  As it
happens, the waters around the eastern Mediterranean are nice and warm and are
quite conducive to the growth of sea sponges.  So, for millennia, the islands
around Greece had supported an industry of sea sponge harvesting.  This isn't
the first time we've encountered sea sponges in this podcast, I mentioned them
in Episode 9 when I was talking about the graffiti in the public lavatory in
Ostia Antica since one of them used the term xylospongium, which was a sea
sponge attached to a stick with which you could wipe your bottom after going to
the bathroom.  At any rate, back before the invention of toilet paper in the
late 19th century, having a sponge around was a useful thing if you were into
hygiene.

But getting these sponges was no easy feat.  They don't really swim around so
you can't just drop a fishing line or cast a net and hope to catch them the
same way you can catch fish.  The traditional means of harvesting sea sponges
was for divers to use a technique called skandalopetra.  The idea was that the
diver would be naked and use a rope to tie a stone around his ankle.  The
stone, in turn, would be tied by a long line back to the ship.  The diver would
jump out of the ship and quickly sink to the depths thanks to the rock tied to
his ankle.  Then he would spend as long as he could looking for and collecting
sponges at the seabed, and once his breath started to run out, he would cut the
rock from his ankle and climb up the rope back to the boat.  Then the rock
could be hoisted up as well, and after the diver had recovered, the whole
process could start all over again.

This technique, centuries old, allowed an experienced diver to get to depths of
about 50 meters or so, but it was limited by how long the diver could hold his
breath, about one and a half to two minutes.  Given the amount of time it took
to dive down and resurface, he would have between 30 seconds and a minute at
the bottom to find and collect any sea sponges.  Given how grueling this feat
was, along with all the preparation that went into securing and recovering the
rock, an experienced diver could only make about 10 dives per day.  So up until
the late 19th century, sea sponges were certainly available in the
Mediterranean cultures, but nevertheless not especially cheap.

But this ancient industry changed dramatically in the second half of the 19th
century.  The 19th century had seen huge advances in diving equipment, and, in
particular, by the end of the century, what is called standard diving dress had
become fairly practical.  Standard diving dress, which was called skafandro in
Greek, is basically what you would imagine in your head when you think of an
old-timey diver.  The diver wore a thick canvas suit with a bronze globe on
their head with little circular glass portholes on the front and the sides.
Then they were connected to the surface with a long tube so they could breathe.
Greek sponge divers were not precious about the old ways of doing things, and
as soon as this new technology came about they became enthusiastic early
adopters.

The skafandro allowed the divers to attain depths of 70 m instead of the 50 m
that had been possible previously, but more importantly, it hugely extended the
amount of time a diver could spend at the seabed.  Rather than spending barely
a minute at a time looking for sponges, they could spend 25 minutes at a time.
Even though with the bulky equipment they only could do two dives a day, that
still allowed for five times as much gathering time as they had available
previously.  Now, this was still not a job for the risk averse, perhaps even
more so than before.  Decompression sickness was not well understood until the
early 20th century, so frequently divers would die from this mysterious
syndrome.  Nevertheless the economic opportunity of harvesting sea sponges was
so much that by the year 1900 there were about 50 teams of divers operating
throughout the eastern Mediterranean, almost all of them Greek, though quite a
few of these Greek crews were based out of the Ottoman Empire.

Well, in the year 1900 a crew of six or seven sponge divers captained by
Dimitrios Kontos had been working off the island of Symi.  As was typical they
had two boats, a mother ship that contained supplies and the sponge harvest,
and a smaller diving boat that would make excursions during the day.  The
diving season lasted from April to October and when the season ended they
headed back to their home port in Tunisia.  But, just as in any good Greek
tale, in the course of their travels a storm blew them off course.  They found
themselves at the island of Antikythera, where they sheltered for a few days.

Now before I go on, I would do well to talk about the island of Antikythera
itself a little bit since it lends its name to the famous mechanism that was
discovered there.  The name Antikythera is actually a fairly modern one.  In
antiquity the island was called Aigila.  It's not a big place, about 8 square
miles, so it could never really support too many people.  Its reputation in
antiquity was for being a base for pirates.  The island is strategically
situated across from the island of Kythera --- Antikythera just meaning
opposite from Kythera, and the strait between the two is the most direct path
to go from the Aegean sea to the rest of the Mediterranean.  Naturally this was
a convenient path for merchant ships to sail and so the island became a natural
location for pirates to hang out and wait for their prey.  Well Rhodes had
tried unsuccessfully to rid the area of pirates for many decades, and the rise
of Rome led to a further increase in piracy in the region.  You see, in 167 BC,
Rome was able to force the port of Delos to be duty free --- any goods passing
through it would be untaxed.  This, naturally, made Delos an extremely
attractive harbor to stop at relative to Rhodes which did have a tax.  After
this happened, the income Rhodes generated from its harbor tax dropped by some
85% and consequently Rhodes was unable to fund its anti-piracy operations in
the region and piracy started to become a much bigger problem.  Since Rome had
effectively kneecapped the anti-piracy task force of Rhodes, by the mid first
century BC Rome realized that if someone was going to do something about the
pirates it would have to be them.  Although Rome was not especially known for
being a naval power, it nevertheless raised a navy and around 67 BC eradicated
the pirate menace in their typically brutal fashion.

Well a few years after that a merchant ship was traveling from the Aegean Sea
towards the western Mediterranean.  It probably departed from one of the major
ports, either Rhodes or Pergamon, and at any rate was carrying goods which had
originated from a variety of locations.  Where it was going we don't exactly
know, but it probably would have stopped at a number of ports and its cargo
would then be passed at those major ports to a smaller ships onward to a
variety of final destinations.  Since the threat of pirates was gone the ship
could take the more direct path near the islands Kythera and Antikythera.  But
tragically the ship was likely caught in a storm.  Being heavily laden with
cargo it quickly sank not too far off of the coast of Antikythera.  We know
that at least two men and one woman died, along with a fourth individual whose
gender can't be determined from its skeletal remains.  Now an older theory has
it that this was a ship containing loot for a triumphal procession of Julius
Caesar since the ship contained so many valuable artifacts from so many
different locations.  But as modern scholarship has learned more about the
ancient maritime trade, the consensus is that this ship is consistent with
being more or less an ordinary merchant vessel of the time.

At any rate, centuries passed and by the late middle ages, after the 4th
Crusade, the island came under the rule of the Republic of Venice where it
acquired the name Cerigotto to distinguish it from the island opposite it which
got the Italian name Cerigo.  It remained a possession of the Republic of
Venice of frankly not much value up until the Napoleonic Wars in the early
1800s.  After the chaos of Napoleon had shaken out, the island ended up in the
hands of the British government where by 1815 it had been spun out as a part of
an autonomous protectorate called the United States of the Ionian Islands.
Now, politically, this region was starting to get pretty restive as the 1800s
progressed.  By this time the Greeks had not had a state of their own for some
2000 years since the Hellenistic Era.  They had by turns been governed by the
Romans and the Byzantines and the Ottomans.  And now some of them felt that it
was high time that they govern themselves.  Being fairly remote, the island of
Cerigotto became a hotbed for Greek patriots who needed to get out of dodge for
a little while.  Being full of patriotic fervor they had no use for an Italian
name for the island so they Hellenized it, turning Cerigo into Kythera, and
hence the island opposite it, Antikythera.

Now in the 1820s, the Greeks had revolted against Ottoman rule.  These kinds of
revolts had occurred sporadically over the centuries and had always been put
down by the Ottomans, and as this one progressed, it looked like the story
would end the same way.  But the great powers of Europe of the day, Britain,
France, and Russia, spied an opportunity.  In the 18th century the Ottoman
Empire had been a thorn in the eastern side of Europe, so, hoping to take it
down a peg, they provided major support for the Greek revolt as it was dying
out and with their help they managed to turn things around for the Greeks and
carve out a small independent Greek state.  In a conference in London in 1830,
Britain, France, and Russia created a government for this new state --- the
Greeks themselves would have no say of course --- and settled upon a monarchy.
Since they needed to preserve the balance of power between each other, they
agreed that the monarch of Greece would not be of British, French, or Russian
extraction.  So they settled on a royal from the Bavarian line who was friendly
with them all, a man who became King Otto of Greece.

Now, King Otto was not very popular with the Greeks.  He imposed high taxes and
as we would say today, he was not a good culture fit.  He was Catholic and had
no desire to convert to Greek Orthodoxy.  He managed to rule for some 30 years,
but his unpopularity ultimately caught up to him and in 1862 he was overthrown.
At this point, the Greek elite started searching around for a replacement.
Monarchy was still in favor and the Greeks understood that their small state
was vulnerable and that they needed to maintain the support of the great powers
if they wanted to survive as a state neighboring the much larger and more
powerful Ottoman Empire.  So they wanted a European royal to replace King Otto
and they had a particular man in mind --- Prince Alfred, a member of the
British royal family and the Duke of Edinburgh.  If they could get a Brit on
board, not only would they automatically have the continued support of one of
the greatest powers in Europe, they could grow the Greek territory by subsuming
the United States of the Ionian Islands that Britain possessed.  The Greeks
harkened back to their ancient democratic roots and held a plebiscite in which
240,000 people voted to express their preference for their next king, and
Prince Alfred got a stonking 95% of the vote.  But sadly this plan was a no go.
The London Conference had held that the Greek crown could not pass to British
royalty, or French or Russian royalty for that matter.  So after scrounging
around the Greeks settled on an alternative, Prince Wilhelm of Denmark, who was
friendly with the British royal family and took the name King George.  But all
is well that ends well and the Greeks got what they were hoping for all along.
As a coronation gift, Britain ceded to King George the Ionian islands, the
island of Antikythera being among them.  So in 1865, after almost 2000 years,
the island of Antikythera had finally come under Greek rule once again.

Well, to get back to the original narrative of the sponge fishers in the year
1900, after the diving season ended and they were blown off course and ended up
at Antikythera, once the storm passed, they decided that now that they were
there, they might as well do a bit more diving and pick up some more sponges
before resuming the journey back home.  During one of his dives, the diver
Ilias Stadiatis noticed some bronze on the seabed.  On his second dive he
brought up an arm from a bronze statue.  Evidently the divers had stumbled upon
a shipwreck full of antique treasures.  Now, officially that was all they did.
They immediately reported their find to the Greek government which organized a
salvage operation of the shipwreck.  But unofficially, interviews with their
descendants 60 years later suggest that they probably did a little bit of
salvaging of their own first and sold some of what they found to antiques
dealers in Alexandria for a bit of extra pocket change.  But regardless, the
scale of the wreck was large enough that they couldn't remove very much on
their own.

Now, one thing that's worth mentioning here is that it's actually a bit
uncertain as to when the discovery of the wreck actually occurred.  According
to some reports, and logically, the wreck was found in late summer since this
was when the diving season ended and the divers were supposedly on their way
back home.  But other reports say that it was around Easter, though
confusingly, those same reports also say that it was at the end of diving
season even though Easter is near the start of diving season.  But one bit of
evidence in favor of this Easter timeline is that there is a report of a
telegraph dispatch from the island of Kythera around Easter 1900 of the
discovery of treasure.  The officials who received this message in Crete just
assumed that the operator was drunk and ignored it, which was probably a pretty
good Bayesian prior, but knowing what we know now, maybe the telegraph operator
in Kythera was providing an accurate report after all.

At any rate, the Greek government organized a salvage operation under the
supervision of the minister of education at the time, a man named Spyridon
Stais.  The salvaging began in November 1900 and the shipwreck immediately
proved itself to be a repository of tremendous riches.  It contained bronze and
marble statues, jewellery, glassware, pottery, coins.  The Greek press followed
the operation very closely, but as the months passed the crews had found the
most prominent relics and then started to recover less and less on each dive.
By the summer of 1901, Stais was having trouble convincing the crews to
continue working since they were coming up with so little.  Probably in July
one of the divers recovered a small nondescript box covered in moss.  The story
has it that it was so unpromising that the diver was going to just toss it off
the side of the ship but was stopped by a naval officer.  At any rate, this
item was catalogued and put onto a shelf in the National Archaeological Museum
of Athens just like all the other low-value items that had been recovered in
the later stages from the wreck.  The salvage operation stopped in September
1901 and the wreck wasn't visited again until an expedition in 1953 by Jacques
Cousteau.

At the time, all the interest in the find was in the statues.  Among all these
other valuable items, the box was completely ignored.  After a year or so of
sitting untreated on a shelf, the exterior of this little box had rotted away
and revealed some of its inner contents.  One weekend, Spyridon Stais happened
to be visiting the museum and perusing its contents.  He had some extra time on
his hands since by this point he was no longer the minister of education.  The
government had collapsed just a few months after the salvage operation had
ended when what are called the Gospel Riots broke out, when a Greek newspaper
published the first copy of the Gospel of Matthew in modern Greek.  At any
rate, Stais noticed that this object contained some brass pieces and that they
had geared wheels.  Gears were only known from a few descriptions in the
ancient literature, and in point of fact, today the Antikythera mechanism is
the oldest surviving geared object in Europe.  Stais realized that this object
was of more than just passing interest, that it was something of some
sophistication.  For this reason, Spyridon Stais is usually considered to be
the man who truly discovered the Antikythera mechanism rather than the unnamed
diver who pulled it out of the ocean.  Now, as an aside, there is some
misinformation out there because Spyridon's cousin, Valerion Stais was the
curator of the Museum at the time, so a number of references mistakenly
attribute the discovery of the Antikythera mechanism to him, including even
that most trustworthy of resources, a Google doodle.  So you have to keep your
eyes peeled to make sure you have the right Stais.

At any rate, the initial interest in the object was actually in the
inscription.  And in particular, people really wanted to know how old it was
and were less interested in what exactly it did.  At the time a major open
question was just how old the shipwreck was.  One theory had it that it was
from the late Hellenistic era, say around 100 BC, and another theory was that
it came from the later Roman era, around the time of Constantine, say around
300 AD.  This second theory was that this ship was full of treasures that
Constantine was shipping to his palace in the new capital of Constantinople.
Now, the shapes of Greek letters evolved over the centuries, so by seeing what
the characters look like, you can very roughly estimate when an inscription was
made.  For example, a W shape for the letter omega starts to become common in
the late Hellenistic era and in the Roman era, the letter epsilon changes from
being written with straight lines like a capital E today, to being written with
curved lines, like a capital C with a horizontal line in the middle.  Likewise
the letter sigma stopped being written as a capital sigma today, but as a
capital C.

So it came to pass that in 1902 the philologist Adolf Wilhelm studied the
mechanism at the museum along with Ioannis Svoronos who was the director of the
Numismatic Museum.  Based on the shapes of the characters in the inscription
Wilhelm concluded that the artifact dated from the second or first century BC,
and what's more, some of the characters he could make out to read "ray of the
Sun," which suggested to him that this was an astronomical device of some sort.
Svoronos, however, had been a staunch proponent of the theory that the
shipwreck was from the late Roman Era and argued that the presence of serifs on
the letters indicated a much later date, more like the 2nd century AD.
Svoronos didn't really know what he was talking about on this point, serifs did
in fact become more common later on, but they were certainly present in earlier
texts and Wilhelm was well aware of this.  Nevertheless, the Greek press was
following anything that had to do with the treasures discovered in the
shipwreck with rapt attention and eagerly played up this scholarly controversy.

Later in the year Svoronos put together a report on the contents of the
Antikythera shipwreck and assigned the section on the Antikythera Mechanism to
Periklis Rediadis who was a naval officer.  In this report, Rediadis presented
the first theory of the device's function.  Based on the astronomical reference
and the gears, he supposed that the device was a kind of astrolabe.  I've
mentioned astrolabes in an earlier episode and they principles behind them were
present by the late Hellenistic era, but they didn't really become popular
until the Middle Ages.  If the Antikythera Mechanism were an astrolabe, it
would have been by far the oldest astrolabe known since otherwise the earliest
surviving astrolabe originates from the Islamic Golden Age.  I won't go into
detail about how an astrolabe works until we get to the Middle Ages, but it is
basically a disc with a stereographic projection of the sky that allows its
user to compute all sorts of interesting things like when and where sunrise and
sunset will be, how long twilight will be for, where the stars will be on the
sky, the length of shadows and so forth.  The astrolabe was a sort of Swiss
army knife of Medieval astronomy.

Rediadis's conclusion that the Antikythera mechanism was a kind of astrolabe
was more based on vibes than anything else.  In the Middle Ages the astrolabe
had been used in maritime navigation and this device was found on a boat.  An
astrolabe was used for astronomical measurements, and this device clearly had
something to do with astronomy.  An astrolabe was a fairly complex instrument,
and this was also a fairly complex instrument.  But this is essentially where
the similarities ended.  An astrolabe is based on a stereographic projection, a
projection of the spherical sky onto a flat plane, and there was no evidence
that there were any stereographic projections on this device.  Rediadis
supposed that perhaps all the gears in the device somehow computed a
stereographic projection, but he didn't really have any specific ideas as to
how this would work.

Rediadis's report noted a number of details about the device, but it wasn't
especially quantitative.  In particular, the first thing that a mechanical
engineer might do when presented with a device like this with a whole bunch of
gears in it, is count the number of teeth on the gears and what the radius was
and see if any of the gears were interlocking, and so on.  But Rediadis was not
so quantitative.  Nevertheless, rather importantly, he took a series of
photographs of the four pieces of the Antikythera mechanism which proved
invaluable to inspire more research on the object.

A few years later, a German philologist named Albert Rehm had seen the
photographs in Rediadis's report and had had his curiosity piqued.  He had been
doing some archaeological work in the Levant, but on his way back home his
travels put him through Athens and he decided to stop at the Museum of Athens
and take a look at this curious artifact.  He didn't have much time before he
had to leave and continue his journey home, only a couple of hours, so he
resolved to focus on what is called Fragment C, which had received less
attention at the time.  Now by this point it was 1905 and the mechanism had
been sitting in the museum for about four years.  It had always been low
priority relative to everything else in the haul, but by now the museum's
conservationist had finally gotten around to trying to restore it.  So when
Rehm got to inspect it it had been cleaned up a little bit and he noticed some
inscriptions that hadn't shown up on the earlier photographs.  The text was a
parapegma.  I talked a little bit about parapegma back in Episode 17, but they
were basically like an ancient Greek almanac, they would specify things like
how many days were in the month, when certain constellations would rise, and so
on.  Rehm also saw the first characters of the word "Aphrodite," which could
refer to the planet Venus.  And furthermore, with this newly cleaned item, Rehm
found that there was a dial with the word "Pachon," which was one of the
Egyptian months.  Now, by the Hellenistic Era, the Egyptian months were in
common use at least for astronomers, along with the usual Greek calendar
because the Egyptian months were very standard.  Rather than following the
phases of the Moon as the Greek months did, each Egyptian month was exactly 30
days long and there were an extra five days at the end of the year with no leap
days.  So the Egyptian months were very regular which made them useful for
astronomical calculations.  In that way they were used a little like the Julian
calendar is used in modern day astronomy.  The Julian calendar has exactly
365.25 days per year and doesn't have any of the weird rules about leap days or
leap seconds that the modern Gregorian calendar does, so it's very convenient
for astronomical observations over long periods of time since you don't
generally care about those things.

Well all this is to say that after Rehm had looked at this thing for a few
hours it was quite clear to him that it really did have something to do with
astronomy.  But he wasn't quite convinced that Rediadis's interpretation that
it was an astrolabe was correct.  Instead he thought that it was a kind of
planetarium that simulated the motions of the Sun, Moon, and planets.  One of
the fragments had a series of rings, so he supposed that a series of pointers
were driven by gears so that their periods matched the periods of the planets.

Albert Rehm's interpretation was closer to the mark than Rediadis's, but he
never published his analysis.  He wrote up his work and submitted it to a prize
competition, but he lost and soon thereafter became caught up in faculty
administration at his university and didn't have as much time for research.  He
had talked about his ideas with a few friends and they had included a
description of the device and his interpretation in their own work, but sadly
the world never got Rehm's full analysis, despite encouragements from his
friends to publish.

Well, the Greek world had always been much more interested in the findings of
the Antikythera wreck than the rest of the world, and in the case of the
Antikythera mechanism this was certainly the case.  What little was published
about it didn't attract much attention abroad.  By about 1910 or so interest in
the object had almost completely died away, and the device lay dormant until
the 1960s.  Until then, if you wanted to figure out what it did there were only
two ways you could do that: look at photographs of it or travel to Athens and
inspect the thing in the museum with a magnifying glass.

So, about half a century passed and everyone associated with the original
investigations died and the artifact remained little understood and more or
less completely ignored.  But this all changed in the early 1960s when an
English physicist by the name of Derek de Solla Price became somewhat obsessed
with the object.  He had been teaching applied math but started to get very
interested in the history of science.  As he was reading about ancient
scientific instruments he came across some brief references to this mysterious
device that had been dredged up in the Aegean Sea and wanted to know more about
it.  Now again, at this time there were only two ways to study the device, look
at photographs of it or visit it in person.  Unfortunately he couldn't afford
to travel to Athens so he made a bold request to the Museum of Athens that they
loan the device to the British Museum so that they could use their state of the
art equipment at the British Museum's research laboratory to study the
mechanism in detail.  But the Museum of Athens felt that the British Museum had
quite enough Greek artifacts thank you very much and flatly denied this request
and was quite clear that under no circumstances would the artifact leave
Greece.  So he had to do the next best thing of looking at photographs.  Now
this wasn't so bad because he was able to get a new set of photographs and they
were much higher quality than the original photographs from 1902.  Furthermore,
the device had, shall we say, evolved in the following six decades.  Of course
in the early 1900s the museum's conservationist had done what he could to
restore it, but also over time bits of it had accidentally gotten damaged or
broken off and revealed parts that had previously been hidden.  Much of this
probably had happened during WWII.  Since Greece was a battleground in the war,
the Museum of Athens had to rapidly protect its contents.  The museum's
curators dug trenches, put all the statues in the trenches, and then filled the
trenches back up.  For the smaller items, among which the Antikythera Mechanism
was undoubtedly a part, they packed them into boxes, put the boxes into the
Museum's basement and then filled the entire basement with sand in the event
that the Museum or its environs was bombed.  So this frantic conservation
effort almost certainly jostled the mechanism more than it had been used to and
revealed previously unseen components of the device.

Well with these photographs Price became extremely intrigued by the object.
Soon after he got a position in the United States and there met the historian
of science Otto Neugebauer.  Now I've really done a bit of a disservice to
Neugebauer in this podcast because I've only mentioned him once before way back
in Episode 5, but he really deserves much more than that.  He was probably the
greatest historian of astronomy in the 20th century, and much of what we know
about Babylonian astronomy in particular comes from his work.  At any rate,
Neugebauer thought that Price was on to something with this device so
Neugebauer helped Price to get a grant for $460 so that he could travel to
Athens for a week and a half and study the mechanism.

That week and a half was longer than the couple of hours that Albert Rehm had
gotten, but in the grand scheme of things it still wasn't that much time and
Price didn't want to waste it.  When he had arrived he spent 10 days taking
copious notes and photographs and measuring absolutely anything that could be
measured of the device, including all 20 of the gears or fragments of gears
that were present.

After Price returned to the States and could start to interpret his notes he
became increasingly convinced that this device was far more sophisticated than
anyone had appreciated, and moreover far more sophisticated than Greek
astronomy of the time was understood to be.  He had a certain flair for the
dramatic and described the Antikythera mechanism in the press a little
hyperbolically as, "like finding a jet engine in King Tut's tomb," and "like
opening a pyramid and finding an atomic bomb."  Based on the device Price
argued that by the Hellenistic Era the Greeks had been far more scientifically
advanced than anyone in the modern world had given them credit for and that
they were in many ways more scientifically advanced than Europeans in the 18th
century.

Now, this is an exaggeration.  But it is certainly the case that the
sophistication of the Antikythera Mechanism, along with a deeper understanding
of ancient astronomical techniques by Neugebauer and other historians of
science in the mid 20th century led to a reassessment of the state of science
in the Hellenistic Era.  As I hope I've made clear over the course of this
podcast, much of what we understand about ancient Greek and Babylonian
astronomy is not self-evident but came through careful readings of oblique
references in a diverse set of texts.  There had always been the Almagest, of
course, which had been commonly read since antiquity and which set a certain
baseline of Greek astronomical sophistication, but the Almagest was mostly
about modeling planetary motions.  All the rest of Greek astronomy, the
estimates of the Earth's size and the distance to the Moon, and Aristarchus's
heliocentric theory, and the measurements of the seasons had to come through
careful study of the classical texts.  So this 20th century discovery of the
Antikythera mechanism fit in with this growing appreciation for what the
ancients were capable of.  A few decades later in the 1990s, Lucio Russo went
even farther and argued that the Greeks of the late Hellenistic Age were even
more sophisticated than is understood and has marshalled a good deal of
circumstantial evidence to suggest that the Greeks had made major advances in
optics and understood that the Earth was not a perfect sphere but was somewhat
oblate.  The arguments are intriguing and not implausible, but still I can't
help but feel regret at what has been lost since it seems there is just only so
much that can be gleaned from the few surviving scraps from all those centuries
ago.

Well, to get back to the Antikythera Mechanism, some sense of regret that more
could not be known was also how Price seems to have felt in the early 1960s.
He had gotten his chance to look at the Antikythera mechanism in person, he
found that it was sophisticated, and believed that it had to be some sort of a
computer, computers of course being quite cutting edge in the 1960s, at least
the kind that used a machine rather than a person.  But he just couldn't quite
piece together how the thing worked, how it all fit together.  In short, Price
was stuck.  He had gotten to the limits of what could be understood about the
device just by looking at it.  There was clearly a lot going on behind the
parts that were exposed to the outside, but no one dared to break it apart and
see what was on the inside.

Which was for the better because a decade or so later the technology had
developed to inspect the interior of an artifact in a non-invasive way with
X-rays.  So, until that happened, during the rest of the 1960s Price turned his
attention towards other scholarly pursuits, in particular the sociology of
science where he noticed a few interesting things like the fact that the number
of pages in the journal Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society grew
exponentially.  He also discovered what came to be known as Price's law, which
states that half of all contributions in a field come from the square root of
the number of contributors to the field.  So if a field has 100 people working
on it, half of all the papers will be written by 10 people.

But in the 1970s radiography had gotten to the point were it was possible to
ship a small X-ray machine to the Museum of Athens and do X-ray imaging of the
Antikythera mechanism.  This then let Price and others get the crucial
information about gears that had hitherto been obscured in the mechanism's
interior and see how they all fit together.  Now, although this was a
breakthrough, these images weren't the easiest things in the world to
interpret.  The X-ray images gave no depth information, you just got a flat
projection, so there was just a big jumble of gears all stacked on top of each
other with no indication as to how they fit in the depth plane.  Price and his
collaborators had tried to get some depth information by taking images at
different angles to produce some parallax or put the film at different
distances since the material would refract the X-rays differently at different
depths, but in practice these ideas didn't really work.  Nevertheless, the flat
images showed the number of gears, how they might interconnect, what the
spacing of the teeth was, which gears had common axles, and so on, and this was
enough for Price to piece together the essential functioning of the mechanism,
and he published his work in a book called Gears for the Greeks.  Now early on,
Price had supposed that the mechanism had something to do with the planetary
motions, just as Albert Rehm had thought, but with the X-ray images he rejected
this idea.  All the gears seemed to be related exclusively to the motion of the
Sun and the Moon.  Price's interpretation of the workings of the gears was more
or less correct as far as it went, but as it turned out his earlier intuition
about the breadth of the device turned out to be more on the money.

In subsequent decades, radiography progressed further with the development of
linear tomography and then computed tomography.  The idea of linear tomography
is that you put the target halfway between the X-ray source and the film and
then you move the source and film towards each other or away from each other at
a constant speed.  Since the diffraction of the X-rays depends on the relative
distance between the source and film and only at the point exactly halfway
between the two is this relative distance constant, the images from other
depths blur out and you get a sharp image at a specific slice through the
object.  By putting different depths at the halfway point, you can then build
up a 3d stack of slices through the object.  Computed tomography also uses the
diffraction properties of X-rays, but in a more sophisticated way where a
computer program can back out a complete 3 dimensional structure from the
diffraction pattern.  By the early 2000s CT technology had gotten good enough
that a CT scanner could be shipped to the Museum of Athens to inspect the
mechanism since their policy that the artifact can't leave the country is still
in force.  Another clever technique that came to be used in the late 20th
century and early 21st century was reflectance transformation imaging.  The
idea here is that you take a series of high resolution photographs of the
artifact's surface but with a light source at a series of angles all around the
object.  By looking at the shadow and reflectance patterns as the light source
changes this allows you to build up a detailed three dimensional reconstruction
of the surface of the object.  These newer techniques revealed a few new
inscriptions and indicated that there were evidently some missing gears,
something that had long been suspected.  Now, all but one of the gears was
still associated with the Sun and Moon, but it was clear that the main driving
mechanism was much larger than it needed to be to drive the lunisolar chain.
Based on the surviving inscriptions and fragments of a plate, along with a lone
gear which does not fit into the lunisolar calculation, it's now believed that
there was another gear chain that had to do with planetary calculations, even
though much of it is missing.

By around the late 2000s, just over a century after its initial discovery,
archaeoastronomers were able to piece together an almost complete picture of
what the Antikythera Mechanism looked like, how it worked, and what its
functions were.  There are still a few uncertainties, particularly regarding
the front side of the device, but given that essentially the entire
three-dimensional structure of the surviving pieces has been reconstructed, it
seems that we're at a point where it's not possible to make any further
progress without discovering additional fragments of the device.

So then, that is the winding tale of how the mysterious Antikythera mechanism
came to be discovered and more or less understood.  But I've glossed over what
exactly it did except for saying that it was a kind of astronomical computer.
So for the rest of the episode I'll give you a quick tour of the device.

Now, today the device has been broken into seven major fragments labeled A
through G, and there are 75 minor fragments.  So what remains of the poor thing
is in 82 pieces altogether today.  But when it was in its prime, the
Antikythera mechanism was a rectangular box about 30 centimeters tall, 20
centimeters wide, and 10 centimeters or so deep, although the depth is a little
more uncertain.  On the side there was some way to drive the entire mechanism,
probably a knob that was turned by hand, though Derek Price at one point made a
more fantastical suggestion that it was powered automatically by a water clock.

Both the front and back of the device were used and it's simpler to start with
a description of the mechanism's back side particularly since much more of it
survives than the front so there's less uncertainty around what it looked like.
Now part of the back face rather unintentionally preserved some critical
information about how the device worked.  It seems that there was a sort of
instruction manual that had been inscribed onto a metal plate or some other
material that had been packed away against the mechanism.  Over the years, these
inscriptions imprinted themselves very subtly onto the back face, so even
though the original material was lost, about 50 lines of text can be seen on
the back face in backwards writing.

The back face itself consists mainly of two large dials.  On top is a dial that
is called the Metonic dial for reasons that will shortly become clear.  The
dial consists of a spiral with five turns, but the spiral is not quite uniform.
On the right hand side the curves of the spiral form semicircles which are
centered on a central point where a pointer would have been mounted.  On the
left hand side, however, the curves of the dial formed semicircles slightly
offset from this central point, on a point a little above it called the
secondary center.  Now this spiral was not painted on to the mechanism's face
but was actually a groove.  So the dial wouldn't have had a pointer quite like
the hand of a clock which just turned around above the dial, but it would have
been a little more like a record player that had a needle which was embedded
into the groove.

Each turn of the spiral was divided into 47 cells, all subtending equal angles
with respect to the axial center.  Since there were 5 turns, there were 235
cells in all.  Now your ears should prick up when you hear this number because
235 is, of course, the number of months in a Metonic cycle, over which time the
phases of the Moon line up with the times of the year.  Each cell was labeled
with a month and a year and on the innermost ring of the dial there was a
series of numbers below some of the cells.  These would indicate which day of
the month was to be skipped since sometimes months had 29 days and sometimes
they had 30 days.  So this would allow the user to keep track of the
progression of the months as time passed and incorporate all the necessary
intercalations.

Within this large dial there were embedded two smaller dials, sort of like how
a watch or grandfather clock might have a smaller dial inside it to represent
the day of the month.  Each of these two dials was divided into four quadrants.
One of these incremented every year and was labelled with the year of the
four-year Olympic cycle.  You may recall from Episode 14 that the Greeks held
the Olympic Games every 4 years, but this was just one set of games in a four
year cycle.  Each year of this cycle had its own game and you could use the
Antikythera mechanism to keep track of where you should be going to get your
sports fix for the year.  The other of these smaller dials was much slower.  It
would only increment when the pointer on the bigger dial had travelled the
entire length of its groove, five complete turns, a complete Metonic cycle.
Unfortunately the dial itself does not survive, only the gears that operated
it, so we don't know how it was labelled.  But because four Metonic cycles made
up a Callippic cycle, this dial tracked how far into a Callippic cycle the user
was.

So that is the upper half of the back panel.  It basically kept track of the
lunar months over the course of a 76 year Callippic cycle.  The lower half of
the back panel had its own large dial.  It was similar to the upper dial with a
spiral, but this time the spiral was continuous rather than being centered on
different spots on the left and right sides and instead of having five turns
this one had four.  All along it the spiral was divided into 223 cells of equal
angular width.  Once again your ears should prick up at the number 223 because
this, of course, is the number of months in the Saros cycle, so this dial is
naturally called the Saros dial.  I've mentioned the Saros cycle a few times
over the course of the podcast but to remind you it's a cycle over which the
phases of the Moon match up with the times the Moon passes through its node,
and as such, lunar and solar eclipses repeat from one Saros cycle to the next.
So the 223 cells of the Saros dial each represented a month, and most of these
were empty, but a few special cells had a label telling you that there would be
a lunar eclipse or a solar eclipse or both that month.  And what's more, the
inscription told you the approximate time that the eclipse was expected to
occur.

Now the Saros cycle does not fit into an integer number of days, it's off by 8
hours, so the times of the eclipses shift by 8 hours from one cycle to the
next.  To help you keep track of this annoying detail, the Saros dial helpfully
had a little tiny dial on its interior that was divided into thirds.  One of
these was empty, the other said 8, and the third said 16.  So to figure out the
time an eclipse was expected to occur, you would look at the time inscribed in
the cell corresponding to the month, and then add the number in the central
dial.

A final detail about the Saros dial was that there were four ticks on the
innermost loop of the spiral and these represented when the Moon was at apogee
during full moon.  So you could also estimate if a solar eclipse was going to be
total or annular from these marks.

So the back panel of the Antikythera mechanism was able to keep track of the
calendar time on the standard Greek lunar calendar and predict the time and
date of eclipses.  The front panel is a little bit more uncertain because less
of it survives but it seems to have consisted of just a single large dial.
Around the edge were two rings.  The outermost ring was marked with the months
of the Egyptian calendar, each month being 30 days plus 5 extra days at the end
of the year.  The inner ring was marked by the signs of the zodiac.  Now
because the Egyptian year had no leap day, it drifted with respect to the stars
fairly dramatically, about one day every four years.  This meant that after a
century the beginning of a year would be 25 days off relative to the equinoxes,
almost a full month.  Consequently, the outer ring representing the Egyptian
year was movable and the user could set it so that its beginning corresponded
to the Sun's location on a particular part of the sky.

Now it's fairly clear based on the structure of this dial that there would have
been a pointer to represent the position of the Sun on the sky over the course
of a year.  But what is less clear is whether or not the pointer just increased
uniformly or if it had a variable motion like the actual Sun does.  If the
pointer did have a variable motion, it would produce an accurate position on
the zodiac ring, but it would then tell you an incorrect day on the Egyptian
calendar ring --- it could be up to two days off sometimes.  It's possible that
there were in fact two pointers here, one which represented the position of the
Sun and one which represented the day of the year, but the pointers don't
survive so this is just speculation.

There was also a pointer which represented the position of the Moon on the sky
and a piece of the gear that held this pointer survives.  The Moon's motion is
non-uniform since the Moon's orbit is eccentric and the gear chain took this
into account.  But what is especially cool is that right at the base of the
pointer there was a circular hole where a small ball was inserted.  The ball
was black on one half and white on the other and rotated around to tell you the
phase of the Moon at a particular time.

The most uncertain part of the mechanism is the other pointers on the front
dial.  There were probably five other pointers, each of which represented the
position of a planet on the sky and these pointers would have accounted for the
non-uniform motion of the planets, including their retrograde motions.  So the
pointers for Mercury and Venus would have tracked the pointer for the Sun
fairly closely and the pointer for Saturn would very slowly wobble its way
around the dial with there being a little retrograde motion on every year.

The knob on the side that drove the entire mechanism was fairly slow.  A single
turn of the knob advanced the state of the mechanism by 78 days.  But because
the entire Callippic cycle lasts 76 years, it would take about 350 turns to
advance the dial for the Callippic cycle from start to finish.  This had to be
done fairly carefully, too.  Because the grooves for the Metonic and Saros
cycles were spirals, the needle would terminate at a certain point, at which
time the operator would have to pull the needle out and reset it at the
beginning.  The mechanism was fairly delicate, too, so if the operator tried to
force the dial when a needle had reached the end of the groove he would have
been liable to break something.  But although the dials on the back panel
advanced fairly gradually, the front panel would have been more exciting with
the Moon's pointer spinning around three times for every turn of the knob.

One last bit that I'll mention is that there was probably some writing on the
front face of the box above and below the front dial, but because this part of
the device was probably wood, it is almost completely gone.  Some traces of it
can be seen in the original 1902 photographs and this illustrates a sort of
paradox that crops up in archaeology from time to time.  Knowing what we know
today, it would have been far better if the device had been immediately
preserved when it was discovered rather than trying to restore it in the early
1900s.  With modern radiography it's possible to peer into the interior of the
device even if it is encrusted in moss and limestone.  But even though the
early restoration efforts possibly ended up removing crucial pieces of
information that could have been recovered with modern technology, without
those restoration efforts, no one would have recognized the significance of the
device in the first place and it wouldn't have gotten the detailed attention
over the decades that the Antikythera mechanism did.  In the end I think we
have to be grateful that as much of it was preserved as it did happen.

So that is a brief tour of the appearance and purpose of the Antikythera
mechanism as we understand it today in 2022.  The device compiled essentially
all the astronomical models of the day into a single marvelous computational
device.  It was in many ways the culmination of both Greek astronomy and
mechanical engineering of the time.

So who was it who constructed this wondrous device?  Here we really have no
idea.  There have been vague speculations that perhaps Hipparchus had a hand in
it, but there is not really much to go on here except that the timing sort of
works out if the device had been built, say 70 or 80 years before it was
transported on its ill-fated journey.  And the ship on which it sank probably
passed through Rhodes, which was where Hipparchus was based out of.  But that
is pretty thin gruel to base a theory on.  Personally I like to think that it
was the handiwork of some nameless otherwise astronomer or engineer who
otherwise left no other record in the literature so that we are forced to judge
their output solely on this one remarkable device.

So that is all I have to say about the Antikythera mechanism.  The next episode
will be the last in our tour of ancient Greek astronomy.  We'll look at a few
of the astronomers of the Roman Era but particularly focus on the last great
astronomer of antiquity, Claudius Ptolemy, who developed the most accurate
model of planetary motion to date, one that became the standard model of
medieval astronomy and would not be surpassed in accuracy for about 1500 years,
not even by Copernicus, until the efforts of Johannes Kepler in the early 17th
century.

I hope you'll join me then.  Until the next full moon, good night and clear
skies.

## Additional references

* Evans, 1998, History and Practice of Ancient Astronomy
* Jones, 2017, A Portable Cosmos
* Lewis, 2009, Surveying Instruments of Greece and Rome
* Lin & Yan, 2015, Decoding the Mechanisms of Antikythera Astronomical Device
