---
categories: episode
date: '2022-02-16'
description: Two philosophers, Leucippus and Democritus, attempted to synthesize the
  monist theories of the earlier natural philosophers with the pluralist theories
  of Empedocles and Anaxagoras.  To do this, they proposed a revolutionary idea —
  that all matter is made of atoms.
keywords:
- astronomy
- history
- greece
- physics
layout: episode
number: 14
title: The Atomic Philosophers
---

## Transcript

Good evening, and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present, with new episodes every full moon.  My
name is Joe Antognini.

Over the past half year we have been getting to know the various ancient Greek
natural philosophers who are rather scandalously lumped together as the
pre-Socratics, and now we are very close to rounding them all out.  But in the
overall arc of the development of this natural philosophy, we had a real
shocker in the last episode.  Up until Empedocles and Anaxagoras, the natural
philosophers all operated under the broad framework of monism.  That is, they
believed that, despite appearances to the contrary, all matter was
fundamentally the same, or at least had its origin in the same thing.  This
overall framework then naturally presented to philosophers of the age two
fundamental problems which needed to be solved: Firstly, what is that
substance.  And secondly, how does that substance produce the matter we see in
the universe.  Because we do see that things are not all the same.  There are a
lot of different kinds of matter, there's air, there's water, there's rock and
metal and fire.  How does a single substance manifest itself in such a way that
it becomes all the diversity of matter in the universe?

But after the efforts of a succession of the most brilliant natural
philosophers of the day, from Thales, who you'll recall was so famous that
plebeians were graffitiing his name in public lavatories centuries later, to
Pythagoras, who generated a cultlike following that persisted for centuries, to
Zeno, whose paradoxes are still discussed to this day, it seems that after all
of the efforts of these brilliant philosophers, no one was any closer to
definitively answering either of these questions.  Each philosopher had his own
unique preference for what the fundamental substance was, and none of the
explanations were very convincing for how that substance produced the manifold
diversity of matter we see around us.  By the time we arrive at 
the Eleatic School, we see that Parmenides has taken monism to its logical
conclusion.  All things are, indeed, one and anything that says anything to the
contrary, like, for example, your senses, is deceiving you.

But in the last episode, this paradigm of monism was completely upended by two
philosophers: Empedocles, who broke from monism in a seemingly tentative way by
saying that there were four fundamental elements: earth, fire, water, and air,
but conceptually was a huge break from monism.  And then Anaxagoras who broke
from monism in a more quantitatively substantial way by arguing that
there were myriads of fundamental elements, and that every bit of matter
contained all of them, just in different proportions.

Now, some listeners may be a little bit disgruntled that I have been spending
so much time over the past several episodes on this monism-pluralism
distinction.  After all, this just concerns the nature of matter, and isn't
that just plain old physics?  This is nominally a podcast about the history of
astronomy.  What do these ideas about the nature of matter have to do with
astronomy?  With apologies to Tertullian, we might ask, "What has Miletus to do
with Greenwich?"

Well, I would like to ensure that all my listeners are fully gruntled.  To take
this question on its face, of course one of the central problems of astronomy
is that of cosmogony --- we see the heavens above us, the stars, sun, moon, and
planets.  How did they all come to be?  What are they made of?  Are they made
of the same things as we have on Earth?  All these are astronomical questions
and need an answer to the question of what the fundamental nature of matter is.
If all things are of a single substance, when the universe was formed, how did
a multiplicity of substances come to be?  How did the Sun and the Moon come to
be and be different from the Earth?

But to take this question of why I've been spending so much time on the
monism/pluralism distinction at a somewhat deeper level, you may recall all the
way back to the first episode when I tried to outline some of my goals in this
podcast.  One of these was to take the astronomers of history holistically and
on their own terms, and not try to pick out bits and pieces of their philosophy
that happen to neatly fall into our modern categories of astronomy.  The people
of this era who had the most to say about astronomy were the natural
philosophers we've been talking about and they were intensely interested in the
fundamental nature of matter, so it is something we ought to consider carefully
when talking about them.  And we should do this is not just out of a sense of a
sort of intellectual respect, but these sorts of philosophical ideas in many
ways motivated the approach they took to answering astronomical questions.  And
not just the approach they took to answering those questions, but these
philosophical foundations were what determined what questions they thought to
ask.  This idea of monism is a good example of what the philosopher of science
Thomas Kuhn called a scientific paradigm.  It was a sort of background
assumption that pervaded and directed the work of the scientists of the time.
In this case, the more or less unstated assumption was that there should be
only a single kind of substance that makes up all matter, and this naturally
led the great philosophers of the day to those two all-important questions:
what was that substance, and how did it produce the great variety of things
that we see.  Because they were working within a monist paradigm it was
essentially guaranteed that these philosophers would spend most of their
energies answering these two questions.

But, in Kuhn's theory of scientific inquiry, as scientists continue working
within a paradigm, they accumulate results which are in tension with each
other, and eventually it becomes apparent that they are in tension with the
paradigm itself.  Then a breaking point arrives and at some point the paradigm
itself has to be discarded and a new one established.  We can see how the
development of Greek natural philosophy from monism to pluralism fits rather
neatly into this pattern.  Over time, various philosophers had argued in favor
of different elements as being the *arche*, the fundamental substance, and they
had made arguments for their own view.  But they could not all be right.  If
Thales was correct that the arche was water, then necessarily anyone who said
it was anything else was wrong.  And that was, after all, everyone else.  So no
matter how persuasive their reasoning was, they could not all be right.  And in
its limit, Parmenides along with his student Zeno had made a very compelling
argument that not only were all things were one, but that this implied that
motion was impossible.  The paradigm of monism had reached a breaking point and
new philosophers had to step in and propose another paradigm.

Now, the way I've told this story to you is rather pat, and I doubt that any of
the philosophers involved in this story was thinking about monism or paradigms
in quite these terms.  And really this kind of story doesn't fit exactly into
Kuhn's structure of science because in Kuhn's conception, the tension that
develops within a scientific paradigm has more to do with observations or
experiments whose results conflict with theory or at any rate are very
difficult to explain within the existing paradigm.  But at this stage of Greek
natural philosophy, at any rate, there is very little in the way of observation
or experimentation.  I had mentioned two episodes ago how Xenophanes had
pointed to the existence of fossils of seashells up in mountains as evidence
that water must have covered the Earth at one point.  But the reason I had
mentioned it was because that it was the exception and not the rule.  The only
real observation that was in tension with the monist paradigm was just the
simple fact that there are different kinds of things in the world.
Nevertheless, that one observation was enough to cause all sorts of trouble for
monism.

Well, the point of all this is that I have been spending quite a lot of time on
the monism/pluralism distinction because these paradigms informed how the
natural philosophers approached their astronomy.  Any monist theory of the
world had to explain how the variety of matter in the world came about from the
one fundamental substance, and that meant that they had to develop a theory of
how the entire universe began, both the earth and the heavens.  This then meant
that they had to say something about what the heavens were made of.  Today, of
course, we naturally think that astronomy should say something about what the
stars are made of.  But that is just because it is a question that naturally
fits into the modern paradigm of astrophysics.  Depending on your paradigm it
is not necessarily an obvious question to ask.  As far as we know the
Babylonians were never interested in that question despite being intensely
interested in astronomy.  Later on in the early modern period to the early
1800s we see occasional speculation about the nature of stars, but not a lot of
debate about the question relative to other scientific questions of the age.
It's always important to understand the philosophical underpinnings of an era,
because those ideas, even though they may be largely tacit, are what direct the
efforts of the scientists of the age.

Okay, so we have seen how monism had some fundamental difficulties and led to a
reaction by Empedocles and Anaxagoras in which they abandoned monism and
proposed pluralism instead --- there was no single fundamental substance, but
instead several fundamental substances.  But this viewpoint also had
difficulties which two subsequent philosophers identified and tried to resolve
with a new way of explaining matter.  These two philosophers were Leucippus and
Democritus.  Now, Democritus is certainly the more famous of the two.  But at
least in the ancient sources, the two of them are almost inseparable.  It seems
that by the time the sources start to survive it had been long enough that the
authors were no longer able to distinguish between the contributions of
Leucippus and Democritus.  It is very rare that one is mentioned without the
other.  Nevertheless, as classicists are wont to do, from these few occasions
they try to glean what differences they can between the two philosophers.  The
general conclusion from these kinds of readings is that Leucippus probably had
the original idea for atomic theory and Democritus, as his student,
enthusiastically took the theory up and expanded upon it.

Well, despite the fact that Leucippus and Democritus are nearly always lumped
together, in this podcast I will take them one at a time.  But do take heed
that there is a fair amount of conjecture when saying that this or that idea is
due exclusively to one or the other.

Now, of the two, Leucippus was almost certainly the older one, but that's
really all we can say for sure about his biographical details.  Even still at
this stage of Greek history, just entering the Classical Era, our knowledge of
births and deaths can still be pretty spotty.  For Leucippus, in particular, we
have very little idea as to when he was born.  We just know that he was active
during the 5th century BC.  He was contemporaneous with Anaxagoras, so may have
been born roughly at the beginning of the 5th century BC.

He was most likely born in Miletus, which of course was still the intellectual
capital of Greece around the time of his birth.  Or maybe he wasn't born there.
Maybe he was instead born in the city of Abdera in Thrace, which for those of
you less familiar with Greek geography is on the coast at the northernmost part
of the Aegean Sea, right where Greece sort of hooks over next to modern day
Turkey.  Or maybe he was born all the way over in Italy in Elea.  Or maybe he
was not born anywhere.  Epicurus claims that Leucippus never even existed at
all.  But this may have just been due to some professional jealousy.  At any
rate, other writers like Aristotle and Theophrastus are quite definite that
Leucippus was the originator of atomic theory.  

Based on the patchy and sometimes contradictory statements in the ancient
literature about Leucippus's life perhaps the most plausible reconstruction of
his life was that he may have been born a little after 500 BC in Miletus.  Now,
you'll remember from the last episode that during the early 5th century BC
Miletus was a tumultuous time to be politically.  The Greeks were expelling the
Persians from the land during the Greco-Persian Wars, and by the 470s, the
Greeks, or, more properly, an alliance of Greek city-states led by Athens, were
driving the Persians out from Ionia.  So by the middle of the 5th century BC,
Miletus was an independent Greek city-state once again.  Sort of.  Over
the course of the 5th century after their victory in the Greco-Persian Wars,
Athens came to grow into a place of hegemony in the region.  And so while
Miletus was nominally independent, it was heavily influenced by Athens at the
time.  In 451 or 450 BC, it seems that there was a revolt in Miletus and the
oligarchs who ruled the city attempted to break free from Athenian control.
But in 450, Athens sent a garrison to Miletus to replace the oligarchs with a
democratic government.  Now, in this particular instance Athens was not
especially interested in making the world safe for democracy.  They simply
wanted to install a government that would be more amenable to their control,
and naturally, this democratic government would be overseen by a commission of
five Athenian rulers called archons.  At any rate, it is conjectured that
Leucippus may have emigrated from Miletus during the upheaval of 450 BC.  He
then may have travelled to Elea where he picked up the ideas of the Eleatics,
and finally travelled to Abdera at the end of his life.

Well, I am starting to feel somewhat unsettled with all this conjecture so
let's move to more solid ground.  As for Leucippus's philosophy itself, his
central idea was the one that both he and Democritus were best known for both
in his day and in our own: his theory of atoms, that all matter is composed of
atoms, which, by definition are indivisible, "atom" literally meaning
"uncuttable" in Greek.  Thus matter cannot be divided indefinitely into smaller
and smaller pieces.  There are fundamental components that simply cannot be
split.

Now, with our modern perspective, we can see this as being a truly
revolutionary idea.  No less than Richard Feynman claimed that if all human
knowledge were lost in a great catastrophe except for a single idea, the idea
that would carry with it the most important foundations to rebuild the edifice
of modern knowledge was the fact that all matter is made of atoms.

But Leucippus himself, along with Democritus, probably did not regard this as
being so much of a revolution as a compromise position between monism and
pluralism.  It was a sort of Hegelian synthesis of these two contrasting ideas,
with monism being the thesis, pluralism being the antithesis, and atomism being
the synthesis.  

So with the thesis of monism, we have the problem that I have been harping on
endlessly now: how do you explain the great variety of matter we see with a
single substance?  The anti-thesis of pluralism then rejects the idea of monism
and says that there are simply many different kinds of fundamental substances.
But then this idea has its own problems, namely, that it doesn't really seem to
explain anything.  We can see that there are patterns across different kinds of
matter.  We can see that water can become steam and steam can condense into
water.  Surely there is some relationship between the two there.  How do we
explain one kind of matter turning into another?  Leucippus's synthesis of
atomism tries to take the advantages of both pluralism and monism and avoid the
disadvantages of both.  So in this theory there are many different kinds of
atoms, which is a sort of pluralism, but each atom is one single kind of
substance, both in the sense of different atoms of the same kind being
indistinguishable, and in the sense that each individual atom is one single
object which cannot be divided, which is a kind of monism.

Moreover, the idea of atoms also solved the vexing paradoxes of Zeno.  How can
you move from one point to another if you have to move first halfway there, and
then halfway from that point, and halfway from that point and so on
indefinitely.  If things were made of atoms which cannot be divided, the atomic
philosophers reasoned, then you can't divide things indefinitely.  So the
proposal of taking an infinite number of steps halfway to your destination
would fail because sooner or later the distance to the destination would be
spanned by a single atom and you could divide it no further.  So the genius of
the atomic theory was that it seemed to unify the various philosophical strains
of the day and solve the problems associated with all of them.

But, of course, there's always a catch.  Atomic theory seems to have solved a
lot of problems with monism and pluralism, but it now presented some new and
tricky problems of its own.  And really there were just two.  What was going on
inside the atoms, and what was going on outside the atoms?  To start with the
second, the whole idea of the theory of atoms was that all matter was composed
of indivisible units called atoms.  But what was it that existed *between* the
atoms?  It could not be other atoms because then you would essentially have the
same problem that Parmenides did.  All the atoms are squashed right up next to
each other and can't move, and so no motion is possible.  Now, Empedocles, in
his system of four elements had argued that it was air that separates all other
matter from itself and allows for motion.  But of course this won't work in
atomic theory because the air itself has to be made of atoms, and what is
separating the air atoms?  So the only possible answer is that empty space
separates the atoms.  But this is a disconcerting position to take.  We
moderners are so accustomed to the idea of space as a vacuum that we don't
really think twice about it, but to the ancient Greek philosophers this was a
hard concept to grasp.  Because, as Parmenides persuasively argued along with a
student of his by the name of Melissus, a vacuum is, by definition, nothing,
and nothing is, well nothing --- it has no properties whatsoever.  And of
course the most basic property that any substance can have is existence.  By
definition the vacuum cannot exist.  

Well, Leucippus gets around this thorny problem with a bit of linguistic
sleight of hand.  Sadly I cannot read ancient Greek, or modern Greek for that
matter, so I cannot go into the details of exactly the wording that he uses,
and anyway his own words do not survive to us so we cannot make his original
distinction even if we wanted to.  But in modern English one way we could put
it is that he admitted that while the vacuum is not *real*, in that it has no
properties and cannot be touched or held, it nevertheless *exists*.  He drew a
distinction between two kinds of existence or reality.  Only matter exists in
the fullest sense.  But empty space exists in one sense but not the other.
Another way to put it is that the universe consists of everything that
*exists*, and that what exists can be divided into what he called the "full"
and the "empty".  The atoms are full, and the space between them is empty,
defined only by the absence of matter occupying it.

Now as can often be the case when thinking about philosophy, particularly some
of the ancient philosophers, it can seem like this distinction is just a game
of semantics.  But it is a distinction with a difference.  Up until Leucippus,
natural philosophers in ancient Greece equated reality with matter.  If a thing
existed, it must be made of something and if something was made of matter, it
must exist.  But Leucippus here introduced a new conception of existence,
something that could exist and yet not be made of matter.

And again, not to put too fine a point on it, if we moderners find this
distinction rather obvious it is because very few of us have thought very hard
about what exactly empty space is or a true, philosophical vacuum is because
these are not the same things.

Now, a risk here is that Leucippus was not actually solving the problem he had
set out for himself of unifying monism and pluralism, but instead just ended up
as a dualist --- a pluralist with two elements: atoms and space.  But thanks to
Leucippus's sleight of hand, he avoided this dreadful fate.  Since the empty
space was defined simply by the absence of matter, because it lacked the
fullness of reality, it didn't exist on the same ontological level as matter
did.  So you couldn't argue that his system was dualist because that requires
the two fundamental elements to be, like Montagues and Capulets, alike in
dignity.  In this case they are not, empty space is clearly ontologically
inferior to matter.

So that is the main problem that atomic theory has *outside* the atoms and how
Leucippus solves it.  What separates the atoms?  Empty space.  So this leaves
us with the second problem that atomic theory has to answer, namely what is
going on *inside* the atoms.  After all, the main claim of atomic theory is
that the atoms are, by definition, indivisible.  This means that they must have
no parts.  And yet, it seems that they must also have extent.  They must extend
across space.  If they didn't then you would need an infinite number of
infinitesimally small atoms to produce objects of finite size, in which case
you're just back at the old conception of continuous, infinitely divisible
matter.  But how can an atom extend across space and yet have no parts?  If an
atom extends across space, it would have, for example, a left side and a right
side.  This means that there is some stuff on the left side that is not on the
right side and vice versa.  But this seems to imply that the atom does, indeed,
have parts.  There is a component of one part of the atom that does not belong
to another part.  Now, Leucippus did not seem to view this as a problem.  Sure
the atom has an extent, but so what?  You still cannot pry it apart and produce
a separate left half and right half of an atom.  But even if Leucippus himself
didn't see this as being a very strong argument, this was one of the arguments
lobbed by other natural philosophers against Leucippus, Democritus, and the
other atomists as to why their atomic theory had to be wrong.

Okay, well I've said a little bit about how atomic theory tried to bridge the
gap between monism and pluralism, but let's go into a little more detail about
that now.  How exactly did these atoms produce different kinds of matter?
Leucippus identifies three qualities to the atoms that produce these
differences.  Now, his terms for these qualities are a little strange to us.
He uses the terms rhythm, touching, and turning.  A more modern interpretation
rather than a literal translation of these words would be something closer to
shape, arrangement, and position.

The quality of shape, which corresponds to Leucippus's literal term "rhythm",
refers, as you would expect, to the shape that the atom takes on.  An atom in
the shape of a sphere would have different properties than an atom in the shape
of a cube, or a dodecahedron or an icosahedron.  Leucippus's term "touching"
corresponds to the quality of arrangement.  So different atoms can agglomerate
together, and depending on which atoms are clustered together and the
arrangement of this agglomeration, which one is on the left, say, and which is
on the right, this can produce different kinds of macroscopic qualities.
Finally, Leucippus's last quality of "turning" corresponds to the quality of
position.  So, depending on how the atom is oriented in space it can have
different behaviors.

To explain these different qualities Aristotle uses an example which he
probably got from Democritus.  You can imagine each of the atoms as a letter.
So, the letter A is different from B because the shapes of these two letters
are different.  But then you can put the letter A next to B to produce AB or
you can put it the other way around and get BA.  These two arrangements could
produce different macroscopic qualities.  Finally, if you consider a letter
like a lower case p, this is like a lower case d turned upside down.  So by
rotating the atoms you can also get different kinds of qualities.

Now, one important thing about this list of these three qualities, shape,
arrangement, and position, is what is *not* there.  Leucippus does not include
some internal kind of substance.  All the atoms are made up of the same thing,
there is just one kind of matter.  But sometimes this matter is arranged
differently or sculpted into different kinds of shapes and this produces
apparently different substances.  So Leucippus can maintain the essence of
monism and still provide a reasonable explanation as to how we see different
kinds of matter in the world and how one kind of matter can turn into another.

From a modern perspective, this theory holds up remarkably well, at least in
its broad contours, even if not in the specifics.  Modern chemistry claims that
all of the matter we see around us is composed of just 94 naturally occurring
distinct elements and by binding different combinations of elements together we
can produce the complete diversity of matter in the universe.  Now, of course,
a big difference from the theory of Leucippus and Democritus is that modern
physics and chemistry hold that there are indeed different fundamental kinds of
atoms.  At one level, there are different elements, and even if you go to the
level of subatomic particles, there are individual units of matter which are
fundamentally different from each other like electrons and up quarks and
photons.  These particles are not different from each other because they have
different shapes, but because other properties like their mass, electric
charge, lepton number, and so forth are different.  In fact, in the standard
model, it is not even possible for elementary particles to be different in
shape because having a shape implies having an extent, and elementary
particles, so far as the standard model is concerned, have no extent at all.

So, Leucippus's explanation that atoms are different in terms of shape does not
hold up so well but his explanation that atoms in different arrangements
produces different kinds of matter holds up remarkably well.  What about the
third quality he describes, that of rotation?  Well, if we squint hard enough
we can make the argument that this does sort of hold up.  One of the principal
discoveries of quantum mechanics is that elementary particles have a property
called spin, which is a sort of internal angular momentum.  This spin can be
oriented in different ways and does distinguish otherwise identical particles.
So, if we are being generous and allow ourselves a bit of a stretch, we could
say that this is sort of like Leucippus's quality of rotation.

Now, apart from laying out these three qualities of shape, arrangement, and
orientation, Leucippus does not have much to say about how exactly these
different qualities produce the different kinds of matter that we see.  He
claims that fire is composed of spherical atoms because the spheres can slip by
each other easily and produce the volatile, effervescent quality of fire.  Not
to get too far ahead of ourselves here, but his student Democritus has a great
deal of fun, by contrast, taking this theory and elaborating upon it and
explaining exactly what kinds of shapes correspond to what kinds of materials.
Leucippus also claims that there are an infinite number of different kinds of
atoms.  In particular, atoms can come in an infinite number of possible shapes.
Now Democritus breaks with his teacher on this point.  Democritus argues that
this is impossible because if atoms truly came in an infinite number of shapes,
then this would mean that some shapes would have to be arbitrarily large,
because you cannot have an infinite number of shapes within a finite volume.
And this means that some atoms would have to be so large that they would be
visible to the naked eye and we do not see any such atoms.  Now to modern ears
this does not sound like a particularly compelling argument, at least it does
not strike me as particularly compelling because it's not obvious why you
couldn't have some arbitrarily intricate shape within a finite volume.

Okay, well we've now seen much of Leucippus's atomic theory itself.  What did
this imply about astronomy?  Leucippus's theory of atoms mostly informs his
cosmogony.  In Leucippus's telling, the universe begins with the atoms
dispersed throughout the void.  Then, gradually, they collect into a vortex.
Over time, the density at the center of the vortex increases, and the increased
congestion of all the atoms trying to move past each other forces the faster
moving atoms towards the outer reaches of the vortex.  Leucippus identified
four stages in the formation of the Universe.  So, in the first stage, the
vortex begins to form.  Now, this initial stage actually presents some
problems, because the atoms all need to start moving for the vortex to form.
But what causes them to move in the first place?  Leucippus does not really
regard this as a problem to be solved, however.  He just says that this initial
motion of the atoms does not need to be explained any more than their positions
need to be explained or their existence at all.  It's just how things were at
the beginning of the universe.  Now, as the atoms start moving around, they
start bumping into each other.  Now, when atoms collide, they can either bounce
off of each other or stick together.  In these beginning stages, they are
mostly just bouncing off of each other.  But the collected sum of all these
collisions is that on average all the atoms start moving in a circular motion
and forming the vortex.  At this point each individual atom is mostly just
going in whatever random direction it happens to be going in, but on average a
slight rotation begins to appear.

Now, in the second stage, the vortex starts to grow.  The larger atoms start to
stick together and fall towards the center of the vortex.  The lighter atoms
continue bouncing around and bounce out of the center of the vortex and end up
in the outer reaches of the vortex.  So during this second stage, we have
bigger atoms in the middle which is now starting to form a circular mass, and
smaller atoms on the outskirts.  But eventually these smaller atoms start to
stick together, too, and they form a membrane or shell around the inner disk.

The third and fourth stages of the creation of the universe are a little more
cryptic at least in Diogenes Laërtius's telling.  But it seems that at the
beginning of the third stage, the disk that is forming at the center of the
vortex is somewhat elastic.  The outer parts are rotating more quickly than the
inner parts, so the whole thing is essentially a fluid like a whirlpool, rather
than a solid like a spinning plate.  But at the center of the disk, the
rotation is very weak and so the largest atoms which are located there can
eventually resist it.  So at some point the center of the disk stops rotating,
and then this provides resistance to the outer layers of the disk so that they
gradually stop rotating as well.  By the end of the third stage, this disk has
stopped rotating entirely.

In the fourth and final stage, the disk at the center of the vortex has
finished developing, and you may have guessed that this becomes the Earth, and
the development of the universe now takes place in this membrane or shell that
appeared during the second stage.  This membrane consists of the finest
elements, and during this stage they now coalesce, both with each other and
with other atoms beyond the membrane that were not caught up in the original
vortex, and become the Sun, Moon, stars, and planets.  As they become
concentrated, these fine elements ignite, which is why these various bodies
shine in the sky.

Leucippus's cosmogony pretty much determines his cosmology as well.  This disk
at the center of the universe is, of course, none other than the Earth, so the
shape of the Earth is that of a short cylinder, like a drum.  The Sun is
farthest away from the Earth because it has to move the fastest in order to
burn the brightest, then there are the stars, and closest to the Earth is the
Moon.  Then the disk of the Earth is tilted relative to the motions of the
outer membrane which explains why the north star is not directly overhead.

Well, before we get too deep into the astronomy, let's turn to Leucippus's
likely student, the more famous Democritus, because he seems to have been more
involved with working out the implications of atomic theory.  Democritus was
quite a bit younger than Leucippus which is why it's usually assumed that he
learned from Leucippus.  Although we don't have a great handle on when
Leucippus was born, probably a bit after the year 500, or maybe thirty years
later, we have a better idea of when Democritus was around.  In fact, the
writer Apollodorus of Athens wrote that Democritus was born in the 80th
Olympiad.  Now, you may remember from the first few episodes of the podcast
that in ancient Mesopotamia, years were generally counted with respect to the
reign of a king.  So a tablet might date itself as being written in the fifth
year of the reign of King Nebuchadnezzar.  This practice was not unique to
ancient Babylon and is quite common in monarchies.  In fact, to this day, the
British Parliament officially archives its acts with respect to the year in the
reign of the sitting monarch rather than with respect to Gregorian year.  But
this technique did not work so well in ancient Greece for two reasons.
Firstly, the city-states were largely independent of each other and each one
might be ruled by its own king or tyrant.  There wasn't the same political
unity in ancient Greece as there was in ancient Mesopotamia.  Secondly, by the
time we get into the classical era of ancient Greece, many of the city-states
have adopted democracy, Athens of course becoming the most important among
them.  So now there is no king at all whose reign you can reference when
specifying a year.  So particularly by this point years start getting specified
with respect to the Olympiad.  

Now, the Greeks had for centuries gathered together at regular intervals to
engage in sporting competitions.  You might recall that I had mentioned in
Episode 9 how Thales may have announced his prediction of an eclipse at one of
the Pan-Ionian games.  This was an event that involved the twelve city-states
of the Ionian League and also had a religious ritual and festivals along with
being the occasion for political discussion among the elite of the twelve
city-states.  Well, the Pan-Ionian games were not the only such competitions in
ancient Greece.  The other regions of ancient Greece had their own
competitions, and the region around Sparta, a peninsula called Peloponnesia,
was no different.  The Greeks in this region had had a competition every four
years called the Olympic Games because it was located at a site called Olympia
which was a sanctuary dedicated to Zeus.  Records of the winners of the
competitions were meticulously kept, going all the way back to the first
competition, so the date of the first competition can be stated exactly: 776
BC.  For the first few centuries, the Olympic Games were just a regional
competition and only athletes from the western part of Peloponnesia, just
around the vicinity of Olympos competed.  But possibly because it had been
around for so long, much longer than the other competitions that rose to
prominence, it began to attract athletes from farther afield.  A century later
the games had started to play a role in the cultural life of Sparta and its
nearby frenemy Athens, both of which were relatively nearby to Olympos, but
further away than the competitors from the first 100 years.  By the early 6th
century they had started to add other competitions around this four year cycle
of the Olympics.  There was the Pythian games that came two years after the
Olympic Games and then the Nemean and Isthmian Games both of which occurred
every other year in between the Olympic and Pythian Games.  Together, these
four competitions came to be known as the Pan-Hellenic games, and over time
they really did live up to this name.

As Athens and Sparta came to occupy a more prominent place in the larger
politics of ancient Greece over the course of the Archaic Age, their athletic
competitions started to become more popular throughout all of Greece.  And by
around 500 BC the winners of the competitions are no longer exclusively from
Athens and Sparta, but start to come from all over the Greek world.  So by the
time we get to the Classical Era this four year cycle of competitions had grown
to play a prominent role in Greek cultural life.  Given the shortcomings of
dating events with respect to the year of a king's reign, it makes sense that
instead authors came to date events with respect to the Olympiad, this four
year cycle.

Well, all of this is to say that when Apollodorus writes that Democritus was
born in the 80th Olympiad we can date that exactly to the years 460-457 BC.
Now, Apollodorus was writing a few centuries after Democritus, so maybe his
confident assertion shouldn't be blindly trusted.  But this is more or less in
agreement with what other authors have to say about the year Democritus was
born, including Democritus himself.  Democritus wrote that he was a young man
when Anaxagoras was old, and given that Anaxagoras was likely born around the
year 500 BC, this would have made Anaxagoras around 60 when Democritus was 20.

Our knowledge of Democritus's life is much more complete than Leucippus's.  He
was almost certainly born in Abdera, which I've mentioned was in Thrace, close
to the northernmost point of the Aegean Sea.  Like pretty much all philosophers
of the day, he came from a very wealthy family.  There is a story that many
years earlier, Democritus's father had even entertained the Persian King Xerxes
during Xerxes's conquest of Greece.  Later on this story grew to include a
detail that some Persian bureaucrats had remained behind in Abdera at
Democritus's household and had taught the young child the secret knowledge of
the Babylonians, including their astronomy, mathematics, and religion.  But
Xerxes's invasion was about twenty years before Democritus's birth so this
detail is almost certainly an embellishment.  

But the reason that this embellishment probably came about is that Democritus
had a detailed knowledge of the science and religion of the near east, and
later authors wanted to explain how he had acquired this knowledge.  Well, we
have strong circumstantial evidence that Democritus did in fact have a strong
knowledge of the near east, in fact he apparently wrote a book titled *On the
Sacred Writings of the Babylonians, so we do have to explain how he got it.
Well, Democritus was not a first born child, he was the third son, so there was
no social necessity for him to remain in Abdera after his father died.  Once
his father died he apparently took his inheritance and used the funds to travel
widely.  He likely visited Egypt and Babylon and some accounts say that he
traveled as far as Persia and even India where he apparently conversed with
what are described as "naked philosophers."  Democritus probably did not make
it so far as India, but given the trade networks of the time, travel to Egypt
or Babylon or both is pretty plausible.  Throughout his life Democritus was
reputed to periodically go "into the tombs" as a sort of contemplative retreat
and he had probably learned this practice from the sages of the near east.

Eventually his travels came to and end and he apparently returned to his
hometown of Abdera, although he probably also continued to travel throughout
the rest of Greece.  He may have made his way at some point to Magna Graecia
and learned from the Pythagoreans there, since he wrote an entire book about
them.  And during all his travels he at some point visited Athens.  In fact he
writes that while there he saw none other than the great Socrates, although he
evidently was too modest or star struck to introduce himself to the great
philosopher.

Well, ultimately he lived to be very old, some 90 years old in fact, or 109 in
some tellings.  There is a story that when he felt it was his time to die, he
refused to eat.  But when he realized that he would die during a religious
festival, he gave up his fast and instead ate loaf after loaf of bread so that
his sister would not have to miss the festival to mourn him.  Towards the end
of his life he went blind, but said that it was no matter because what he could
see with his soul's eye was more beautiful.  His optimistic character led to
him being known as the "laughing philosopher" in contrast to Heraclitus whom we
talked about in Episode 10, whose pessimistic view of humanity earned him the
nickname "the weeping philosopher"

Well, so much for the life of Democritus.  We know that at some point he
interacted with Leucippus, probably late in Leucippus's life when he had likely
moved to Democritus's hometown of Abdera.  And from him, Democritus learned of
the atomic hypothesis and became an enthusiastic proponent of the idea.  Quite
unlike Leucippus who wrote maybe one work, and probably not even that,
Democritus was exceedingly prolific.  Some seventy works are attributed to him.
But, as is ever the tragedy when dealing with ancient Greek literature,
virtually all of his output has been lost except for a few fragments here and
there.  But, at the very least, we do have the titles of these lost works from
the Roman grammarian Thrasyllus and they give a tantalizing indication of the
tremendous breadth of Democritus's interests.  To give you a sampling of the
topics Democritus wrote on, a few of the titles are: On the Disposition of the
Wise Man, On the Things in Hades, On Manliness, On the Planets, On the Senses,
On Magnets, Description of the Heavens, On Verbs, On Diet, and my own favorite,
Fighting in Armor.

Well Democritus is, of course, best known for atomic theory.  And as I
mentioned at the outset of this episode, his atomic theory is largely
inseparable from that of Leucippus's.  But one area where Democritus did go
further than his teacher was in specifying what kinds of atoms made up the
various substances of the world.  In particular, he argued that the heavens
were all made of very round atoms, either spherical or something very close to
spherical.  Because of the spherical shape, these atoms could easily move past
each other and were extremely volatile and were the main component of fire.
This then, is what produced the fiery appearance of the stars, Moon, Sun, and
planets.

Now Democritus also broke with his teacher in his cosmogony.  Leucippus
produced an elaborate tale in which the atoms collect in a vortex and gradually
coalesce into the Earth and the heavens.  But to Democritus this kind of a
beginning was impossible, for, in the formal Latin that the argument came to be
known as, ex nihilo nihil fit, or "nothing can be created from nothing".  The
idea is simply that if there is nothing, then it cannot create anything.  This
means that the universe must be eternal, because otherwise at one point there
would have been nothing, and nothing can be created from nothing.  Now, this
argument was not original to Democritus, you probably won't be surprised to
hear that Parmenides espoused this idea, too, but even he wasn't the first.  It
is an ancient argument and goes back much further.

But Democritus almost certainly crossed paths with Anaxagoras at some point in
his travels, because much of his astronomy is taken from Anaxagoras, though he
does change a few details here and there.  In particular, Democritus claims
that Venus is closer to the Earth than the Sun.  So the order of the heavenly
bodies from closest to Earth to farthest away goes Moon, Venus, Sun, the other
planets, and then the stars.  Democritus's model of the Earth was also a little
unusual.  Like Leucippus he also described the Earth as being more or less
flat, but with the sides a little higher than the middle like the surface of a
drum.  But he did not believe that the Earth was exactly circular, rather he
believed that one direction was one and a half times longer than the other so
that it was rather oval in shape.  But unfortunately nothing survives to tell
us why exactly he favored this shape.

One of the unique views in Democritus's astronomy was his opinion of comets.
He believed that they appeared when two planets or two stars came into
conjunction with one another so that their rays united.  Well, because
Democritus repeated so much of his astronomy from Anaxagoras, there's really
not a lot more to say, though one thing that's worth highlighting is that along
with Anaxagoras and Leucippus he believed that there were many worlds.  This
seems to have been a not uncommon belief among many of the pre-Socratics
despite the fact that nearly all of them professed a geocentric cosmology.
Now, where these other worlds existed seems to have varied somewhat.  Some held
that the other planets were worlds much like the Earth, with plants and animals
living on them.  Others seemed to hold that there were simply separate solar
systems not visible to us.  This seems to have been Leucippus's conception.
The Earth and the heavens were created in this great vortex, but there had been
other vortices elsewhere in the universe and they had created their own worlds.

Well, Leucippus and Democritus were highly influential to the philosophy of
ancient Greece.  Atomic theory did not die out with them but persisted in its
own school, though none of its other members enjoyed anywhere near the fame of
its founders.  But one student of the school is worth briefly mentioning and
this was Bion of Abdera.  Bion argued that there were parts of the Earth where
it was day for six months and night for six months.  Sadly, only a single line
from Bion of Abdera's life survives and it's in Diogenes Laërtius's Lives of
the Eminent Philosophers, and it basically just says that.  Actually, Diogenes
Laërtius was writing a chapter on an entirely different person who just
happened to be named Bion, but at the end of his chapter notes that there were
10 other philosophers named Bion and gives a one sentence description of each
of them.  So that is all that has survived of Democritus's student, Bion of
Abdera.

But Leucippus and Democritus influenced philosophers who made greater names for
themselves than poor Bion of Abdera, even though these philosophers founded
their own schools.  The best known of these was Epicurus who adopted many of
the elements of atomic theory, but his philosophy was so distinct that it is
classified into its own school, the Epicurean School.  Epicurus, of course, was
hugely influential both in his day and our own and is well enough known today
to have inspired the adjective "Epicurean", although the modern usage of the
word is only loosely related to Epicurus's original philosophy.  But Epicurus
was largely interested in how to live the good life.  He did not have much time
for traditional philosophical subjects like epistemology or even, I'm sad to
say, astronomy.  Apparently he even banned the study of logic and rhetoric in
his school.  Since he had little to say about astronomy I will return the favor
and say little about him.

Well, the last thing I'll say about atomic theory, at least in this episode, is
with regard to a cross cultural connection which I hope to say more about in a
future episode.  Earlier I had mentioned that there are tales of Democritus
traveling all the way to India and learning from the so-called "naked
philosophers."  This trope of the naked philosopher in the East actually occurs
in a number of places in Greek texts.  The Greeks even had a word for them, the
gymnosophists.  It probably had some basis in reality, although which sect or
school it was about is not entirely clear.  It may have been in reference to
monks of the Digambara school of Jainism since they practiced a very severe
asceticism which sometimes included giving away all their possessions including
their clothes.  Now, whether or not Democritus had made it that far east is
unknown and on the whole probably unlikely.  But there is an intriguing
connection to some of the natural philosophy that developed over in India
around this time.  In particular there is an ancient Indian text known as the
Vaisesika Sutra which puts forward a natural philosophy that is largely in
agreement with the natural philosophy of both Empedocles and Democritus.  The
text holds that there are four fundamental elements and these are identical to
the four classical elements in the West, with the exception that it takes light
to be an element rather than fire.  And what's more, the text also adopts an
atomic theory and states that these four elements only appear in a finite
number of atoms.  Now, frustratingly, there is a pretty big uncertainty in the
date for this text.  It could have been authored anywhere between the 6th and
2nd century BC, although recent scholarship has favored the later dates.  If it
is on the later side then it would have been written well after the time of
Democritus and Leucippus and couldn't have influenced them.  But the earlier
date at least opens the possibility that some of these ideas were not original
to ancient Greece.  And regardless, it's important to note that even if the
text was written later, it may have been derived from oral traditions which
were even older.  We tend to view the ancient world through the lens of
individual empires.  We look at ancient Babylon or ancient Egypt or ancient
Greece and we maybe talk about their wars with each other.  But particularly
after the recovery from the Late Bronze Age Collapse people traveled far and
wide in the ancient world and even if they individually did not span the entire
Eurasian continent, chains of trade and exchange did.  So tales and ideas made
their way to far off lands.  And even if the tales were tall and the ideas
strange and distorted, strange and distorted ideas can still have impacts in
new lands.  All this is to say that we really can never treat these
civilizations of the ancient world in isolation from one another.  They all
influenced each other, sometimes across large distances and teasing apart which
ideas are truly original to which civilization can be a difficult or even
impossible task.

Well, for the past five episodes I have been telling you about the astronomy of
a number of ancient Greek philosophers who at the beginning of this episode I
told you are scandalously lumped together as the pre-Socratic philosophers.
But in the next episode we will finally cross that threshold out from
pre-Socratic philosophy and into the world of philosophy in Athens after
Socrates where we will look at the astronomy of a philosopher who would be of
titanic influence in Western thought for centuries: Plato.  I hope you'll join
me then.  Until the next full moon, good night and clear skies.

## Additional references

* Bailey, Cyril: The Greek Atomists and Epicurus, 1928
