---
categories: episode
date: '2022-06-14'
description: Two of Plato's students were notable astronomers. We looked at one of
  them, Eudoxus, in the last two episodes. In this episode we turn to Plato's other
  student, Aristotle. Aristotle embellished Eudoxus's model of planetary motion, but
  also developed a comprehensive physics and cosmology that ultimately became the
  standard model of the universe during the High Middle Ages.
keywords:
- astronomy
- greece
- history
- philosophy
- physics
layout: episode
number: 18
title: Aristotle, Plato's Other Student
---

## Transcript

Good evening, and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon.  My
name is Joe Antognini.

Two episodes ago we learned about one of Plato's students, a man by the name of
Eudoxus who developed the first sophisticated model of planetary motion, an
idea that today goes by the name "the theory of homocentric spheres" because
all the spheres in this model were centered on a single place, the center of
the Earth.  And towards the end of the last episode we learned about how
Callippus, one of the students of Eudoxus, had modified this theory of
homocentric spheres.  Callippus was probably too young to have learned from
Eudoxus directly, but was taught from Eudoxus's other students and then
developed the model further by adding in more spheres to fix some of the
deficiencies that Eudoxus's model had, particularly when describing the orbits
of Mars and Venus.  In this episode we'll turn to another student of Plato's
who also added his own embellishments onto Eudoxus's theory, but had a lot of
ideas on a lot of things to boot.  As you will have seen from reading the
show's title, this man was, of course, Aristotle.  It's quite hard to overstate
the influence of Aristotle on the western intellectual tradition, and in some
ways the history of western philosophy can be viewed through the lens of an
eternal competition between Plato and Aristotle's philosophical visions.

But before we get to these lofty matters, I think we should spend some time
with the man himself and the broader culture he was working in.  Aristotle was
born in 384 BC, so was about 40 years younger than his teacher Plato, and born
about twenty years after all the turmoil that resulted when Sparta beat Athens
in the Second Peloponnesian War and had installed the Thirty Tyrants who
instigated a reign of terror.  He was born in a small town called Stagira which
was located in a relatively unimportant region in the north of Greece called
Macedonia.  Or at least, at the time of Aristotle's birth, the Kingdom of
Macedonia was of no real importance.  It had existed for several centuries as
one out of the multitudes of Greek statelets and around the time of Aristotle's
birth was more or less struggling for its survival and was being harassed on
all sides by its neighbors.  But Aristotle's life coincided almost perfectly
with the unbelievable rise of this podunk kingdom in northern Greece to the
largest empire the world had seen to that point.  Aristotle died just one year
after Alexander the Great, who by his death at age 32 had expanded his empire
all the way east to India.  You may recall from Episode 8 that the history of
ancient Greece is traditionally divided into five eras: the Dark Ages, the
Archaic period, the Classical period, the Hellenistic period, and the Roman
period.  The death of Alexander the Great in 323 BC is the canonical
demarcation between the Classical period and the Hellenistic period, so
Aristotle's life came at the tail end of the Classical period.

Now, Aristotle wasn't just any old Macedonian, he had close connections to the
Macedonian royalty.  His father, a man named Nichomacus, was the personal
physician to the Macedonian king Amyntas III.  We have some evidence that as a
child he probably helped his father out in his work which may help to explain
his later particular fascination with biology.  But he did not have the
opportunity to learn too much from his father because both his parents died at
the time he was 13.  He stayed in Macedon for the remainder of his childhood,
but when he came of age at 17, he travelled south to Athens where he joined
Plato's Academy.  And there he stayed for the next 19 years of his life.  We
don't really know too much about this rather substantial chunk of his life.
From his later writings it seems that he entered the Academy as an enthusiastic
disciple of Plato, but over the years began to have certain doubts about some
of the fundamental principles of Plato's philosophy.  But this all is a bit of
conjecture because none of his surviving works are thought to have been written
during this two decade long span.  At least as an author, Aristotle apparently
got a rather late start.  We do know for certain that Aristotle admired his
teacher tremendously.  He wrote that Plato "was a man whom the bad have not
even the right to praise --- the only man, or the first, to show clearly by his
own life and by the reasonings of his discourses, that to be happy is to be
good."

Well, after Plato died in 348 BC, Aristotle left Athens for the city of Assos
in northwestern Anatolia.  There are a few guesses about his motives in leaving
Athens.  One possible reason for his departure is that he was not happy with
the new head of the Academy, a philosopher named Speusippus.  Speusippus seems
to have deviated from Plato's teachings, especially on Plato's theory of forms,
but this doesn't really seem to be a good enough reason for Aristotle to have
become so upset as to leave since by this point Aristotle himself was almost
certainly also having his own doubts about Plato's theory of forms.  So it is
conjectured that perhaps he was upset with more prosaic aspects of Speussipus's
management of the day-to-day life in the Academy.  But another possible reason
that Aristotle may have thought it was prudent for him to put some distance
with Athens was a rise in anti-Macedonian sentiment in the city around that
time.

Now, to understand why resentment had been building in Athens against what had
up to now been a marginal kingdom in a marginal region of Greece, I'm going to
momentarily pause the biography of Aristotle and take a detour towards what had
been going on in Macedonia at the time that took it from being irrelevant to a
military juggernaut in just a few decades.  So, to rewind the clock back to the
time of Aristotle's birth in 384 BC, at this point Macedonia was not in a good
way.  I mentioned earlier that it had existed as a small kingdom for centuries,
but wasn't really of too much importance in the larger geopolitics of ancient
Greece.  It was in the northern part of Greece, sort of nestled in where the
country starts to hooks east over the Aegean Sea.  Surrounding Macedonia to the
north and the east was the region of Thrace, and to the south was the region of
Thessaly, maybe today best known for St. Paul's two rather apocalyptic letters
to the Thessalonians.  Further south was a region of mountainous terrain that
was difficult to navigate with the exception of the crucial pass at
Thermopylae.  And even further south of that, separated geographically, was the
real center of Greek culture and politics: the cities of Athens, Thebes, and
Sparta.

Now more than a hundred years earlier had been the first invasion of Greece by
the Persians under King Darius.  In the eyes of the rest of Greece, or at least
in the eyes of Athens and Sparta which had formed the backbone of resistance to
the Persians, Macedonia had not exactly covered itself in glory in this
conflict.  They capitulated to the Persians almost instantly and for the next
century or so acted as enthusiastic lackeys for the Persian government.  Their
royalty intermarried with high ranking Persians, and they took advantage of
their good relations to borrow the Persian military from time to time to try to
expand their borders into neighboring Greek kingdoms.  And during the second
Persian invasion of Greece, they actively fought on the side of the Persians
against Athens and Sparta.  I mentioned in an earlier episode that in popular
consciousness we often think of the Greeks as heroically resisting the invading
Persians, but in reality most Greek city-states were neutral in the conflict
and a large number of them actively fought on the side of the Persians, and
Macedonia was one of these.  It's no surprise then, that in Athens, opinions of
Macedonians were not exactly high.  After the Persians were expelled from
Greece in 480 BC, a century before Aristotle's birth, Macedonia, rather
sheepishly, went to Athens and asked for friendly relations.  Athens did not
feel especially magnanimous in the moment and more or less told them to pound
sand.  So, over the course of the 5th century, as Athens's power in Greece
grew, Macedonia found itself in a progressively weaker and weaker position.
Various kings in neighboring kingdoms tried to grab territory, Athens
encouraged settlers to colonize regions in Macedonia, and Athens provided
military support to anyone at all who wanted to revolt and challenge the
Macedonian king's right to the throne.  So, over the course of the 5th century,
Macedonia lurched from crisis to crisis.  To try to find some friends with some
influence, they tried allying themselves with Athens's archrival Sparta.  But
during the Battle of Lynketis the Macedonian army ran away before the battle
even began after they got spooked when they saw the size of the opposing army.
After seeing the Macedonians scatter without even giving an appearance of
putting up a fight, the honor-obsessed Spartans lost all respect for the
Macedonians and decided to steal their supplies after the Macedonians
retreated.  So in the end the Spartans saw the Macedonians as cowards and the
Macedonians were angry at the Spartans for stealing all their stuff.

The next century did not start off much better.  In 399 BC the King of
Macedonia of the time, Archelaus I, was assassinated and the kingdom fell into
civil war for the next six years.  Now around this time Macedonia's old enemy
Athens was now losing influence after its defeat in the Peloponnesian War.  So,
over the next thirty years or so, Thebes started to rise as the main player in
Greek affairs.  Thebes warred against, and eventually defeated Sparta, and
during this time started to project its power north as well, into Macedonia.
At one point, around the time of Aristotle's birth, the king of Macedonia,
Amyntas III was forced to flee to escape an invasion.  Ultimately Macedonia
became essentially a vassal state and was forced to provide royal hostages to
Thebes as collateral to ensure that they didn't get any bright ideas.  One of
these hostages was a brother to the king named Philip II.

Now, I'm really racing over centuries of history because, after all, this is a
podcast about the history of astronomy, so you'll have to forgive me for
skimming over all the details in the remarkable turn of events that then
occurred after the death of King Alexander II.  Another brother of Alexander II
succeeded him to the throne, named Perdicas III, but Perdicas died in battle.
The throne then fell to Perdicas's son, Amyntas IV, but he was an infant at the
time, so Perdicas's brother, Philip II, usurped the throne in 359 BC, around
the time that Aristotle had been in Athens studying at Plato's Academy for
about five years.  And this is where the fortunes of Macedonia really start to
turn around.  At this point the fact that Aristotle was a Macedonian was
probably seen as a somewhat shameful quality in a man, but ultimately harmless.
What was the worst that a Macedonian going to do to you --- run away from you
in battle?

Now, when he ascended the throne, Philip had been a hostage in Thebes for many
years and an upside of his captivity was that he had had the opportunity to see
how things were done in a city-state that wasn't a complete disaster.  He may
have been a hostage of Thebes, but he was noble so it's not as though he was
thrown into a dungeon.  The Thebans just wanted him around so that if his
relatives back home did something to upset Thebes, Thebes could exert a little,
ah leverage.  So when Philip acquired the throne and was permitted to return
home, he had gotten a few ideas for reforms to make from his time in Thebes.

He first started with his military.  He instituted rewards and promotion for
good service, generally good policy in any organization, and he introduced a
new set of tactics.  You may recall from many episodes back I talked a little
bit about the hoplite as being the foundation of the Greek military.  Hoplites
were freemen who could afford the necessary equipment to join the military.
The two most important pieces of kit were the spear and the shield.  A hoplite
held his shield with his left hand, and his arm went through a strap in the
center of the shield and gripped a strap at its rightmost edge.  Because the
shield tended to cover only his left half, he relied on his neighbor to the
right to protect his right side.  Then with his right hand he held a spear
about nine feet long.  Philip's innovation, inspired by what he saw in Thebes,
was to give his soldiers spears that were about twice as long as the standard
spear, so around 18 feet long.  But because of their length, they were much
heavier than the usual spear and had to be held with both hands.  This meant
that they couldn't hold a shield, so instead they just hung their shields from
their neck, making it more like body armor.  But because their spears were
twice as long as those of their opponents, their opponents had a hard time
getting close enough so that they could take advantage of the smaller shields.
To make matters worse, or better if you were a Macedonian, because the spears
were longer, spears from ranks further back in the phalanx would extend past
the front, which essentially doubled the effective number of speartips exposed
to the enemy.  This innovation turned out to be extraordinarily effective for
Macedonia and was a big reason that they were the dominant military tactic for
about 150 years until it was displaced by the development of the Roman legion.

Well, the military couldn't turn itself around overnight, so Philip II made a
number of deft diplomatic moves to give the military the time it needed to
train for this new way of fighting.  Philip essentially bought off his
neighbors to bribe them into not invading him, at least for a little while.
But within a year he took his shiny new army for a test drive against a
contingent of Athenian mercenaries in the Battle of Methone.  The Macedonians
won handily which surely brought up morale since it was the first time in a
long time that anything good had happened to them on the battlefield.  Soon
enough he started attacking his neighbors one by one in quick succession so
that they didn't have time join up and combine their much larger forces against
him.  Now, I mentioned earlier that Athens had been sending settlers up into
Macedonia and several cities in the region were allied with Athens.  In his
effort to gain control over the region Philip II was able to take these cities
but was always careful to leave them in good condition, and in particular to
treat any Athenians very well in order to avoid needlessly antagonizing Athens,
which was still a relatively formidable foe.  Over the course of a remarkable
five years, Philip II transformed the Kingdom of Macedonia from a state of near
collapse to one which was fairly secure in its borders. Most kings I think
would have been content with a turnaround like that, but this was really just
the beginning for Philip.  He then started to push his influence south and took
advantage of a rather abstruse religious conflict that had been brewing for a
few years.  The essence of the conflict was that a group called the
Amphictyonic League had been governing the Temple of Delphi, which was the most
sacred religious site for the ancient Greeks.  We've periodically heard
prophecies uttered by the Oracle of Delphi, who was the high priestess of the
temple there.  Well, acting essentially as a puppet of Thebes, the Amphictyonic
League had imposed an enormous fine on the Phocian confederation to punish them
for failing to help them in a past war.  But this fine was so big that the
Phocians could never in a million years pay it and felt that they were left
with no option but to go to war and seize the Temple of Delphi.  This then set
off a complicated regional war called the Sacred War, or, if you are counting
all of the other ones which were less important, the Third Sacred War.  I won't
get into the details of this messy conflict, but the various parties involved
began asking their allies for support and Philip II saw that this was a great
opportunity for him to swoop in and exert his influence in the region.  So he
joined the fray on the side of Thebes and Thessaly, to fight a proxy war
against Athens who were supporting the side of the Phocians.  Philip's actions
were decisive in ending the war, and as such the Thessalonians appointed him
archon, essentially making him ruler not just of Macedonia, but of Thessaly as
well, which, in effect, expanded the size of his army.  This then allowed him
to easily make his way all the way south to Thermopylae, which was the main
pass to go between northern and central Greece, which then gave him the means
to credibly threaten to invade Athens itself.

So, when the Sacred War ended 346 BC, Philip II had now essentially become the
undisputed ruler of much of northern Greece, and held control of the main pass
into central and southern Greece, which meant that he could easily continue to
march straight on down to Athens.  It's at this point that Athens starts to get
really alarmed.  They had been seeing the power of their city-state decline for
about half a century now, and an upstart king from the boonies was now nearly
at their doorstep.  Well, right as all this was happening, in 348 BC, Plato
died, so it's not hard to see why anti-Macedonian sentiment was starting to
simmer in Athens and Aristotle may have started to wonder what exactly was
keeping him in this increasingly hostile city now.

As it happens, Athens couldn't keep to the peace that it had agreed to, and six
years later they went to war with Macedonia again, but this time were
decisively defeated.  Now, it's worth pointing out that through all of this
Philip II always gave Athens good terms in his peace settlements.  He seems to
have felt that it was more important to not antagonize them too much so that he
could be on their side in the future, and, in particular, take advantage of
their world-class navy.  At any rate, after this last defeat, Philip II did
what no Greek before him was capable of doing --- he united Greece in what is
called the League of Corinth.  Being a proud lot, all the city-states nominally
retained their independence, but Philip required that they stop attacking each
other, ally with each other, and guaranteed that they would meet with his army
if any of them stepped out of line.

Well, during the uneasy peace before this last war, Aristotle left Athens.
Now, as I mentioned at the outset, Aristotle was raised in the Macedonian court
and was well known to Philip II.  Philip asked Aristotle to travel to a city
called Assos in northwestern Anatolia in the hopes that Aristotle might build
good relations between Macedonia and Assos since it was in a strategically
valuable location.  So Aristotle travelled to Assos with his friend, a
philosopher named Xenocrates.  It's maybe a bit ironic that Xenocrates of all
people was the one who accompanied Aristotle on this quasi-diplomatic mission
for Macedonia because although Xenocrates wasn't Athenian, he was from the
East, a Chalcedonian, he was no great fan of Macedonia and was known for
opposing Macedonian influence in Athens.  There is a tale that later in his
life Alexander the Great sent him 30 talents of gold, maybe the equivalent of
10 or 20 million dollars in today's money, and Xenocrates sent it back saying
that kings are the ones who need money, not philosophers.  Well, in Assos he
was hosted by the tyrant, a man by the name of Hermias.  Hermias had a rather
unique background for a ruler.  He spent his youth as a slave.  His slaveowner,
a tyrant named Eubulus evidently recognized his intelligence and had sent him
to Athens to be educated by Plato, which is how Hermias had met Aristotle.
Eubulus died not too long after Hermias returned to Assos and by no small feat,
Hermias acquired not only his freedom, but political power as well and stepped
into the power vacuum left by Eubulus.  So, by the time Aristotle and
Xenocrates arrived at Assos, Hermias had turned his life around quite nicely.
Aristotle spent the next three years enjoying Hermias's hospitality and
apparently occupied himself with scientific investigations into marine biology
at the coast.

These three years were not so pleasant for Hermias, unfortunately.  He ended up
getting caught between the great powers in the region, Athens, Macedonia, and
Persia.  Persia had long been a threat to Hermias since his lands had
previously been Persian territory prior to their retreat eastwards after the
Second Persian invasion.  Naturally the Persians had been angling to recapture
this land.  Hermias didn't have anywhere near the military strength of Persia,
so he was quite keen on building up his relationship with Macedonia so that he
could count on them for protection.  But Athens was none too happy with this
relationship since they were afraid that if Philip II were ever given the
excuse to provide military aid to Hermias, this would give him a foothold in
Asia Minor from which he could grow his area of de facto control.  So Athens,
in an ironic turn of events, threatened to ally with Persia and attack
Macedonia, a fellow Greek kingdom, if Philip provided any military support to
Hermias.  Now, throughout this the later authors tell us that Aristotle was
continuously writing letters to King Philip requesting that Philip help his
friend Hermias defend himself from the Persians.  But Philip decided that it
was just not worth it and left Hermias high and dry.  Persia ultimately hired a
mercenary by the name of Mentor who managed to kidnap Hermias and torture him
for information about Macedonia's plans to invade Asia Minor.  Hermias
apparently told his captor nothing and is reputed to have said before dying,
"tell my friends that I have done nothing shameful or unworthy of philosophy."

After the death of Hermias, Aristotle found it prudent to move once again and
this time went to the island of Lesbos, bringing along with him Hermias's
daughter Pythias, whom he married within a few years.  Pythias must have been
quite young, probably in her mid teens, because at the time of her father's
death she was not yet of age and Aristotle married her only a few years later.
What the marriageable age was in Assos is not known, at least to me, and the
marriageable age did vary substantially in ancient Greece.  It was especially
young in Athens at 12 or 13, but the Spartans waited until 18.  In most regions
was between 14 and 16.  At any rate, Aristotle was likely around 25 years older
than she was.

Well, during his time in Lesbos, Aristotle was accompanied by another friend,
one we have heard of on a few occasions, a philosopher named Theophrastus.
Theophrastus was the one who wrote a comprehensive treatise on the history of
physics which was tragically lost, but which formed the basis for several later
works which did survive, one of which, St. Hippolytus's Refutation of All
Heresies, followed it so closely that we can reconstruct the chapters in
Theophrastus's original work.  Aristotle spent two years in Lesbos continuing
his biological investigations and then received a request from King Philip that
he return to Macedon and became a tutor to his son Alexander.  Aristotle was
certainly not the boy's only tutor, we learned last month of Menaechmus who
taught the boy geometry, and almost certainly there were many other tutors
besides.  Nevertheless, given the enormous stature of Aristotle in the
intellectual realm, and the enormous stature of Alexander the Great in the
realm of politics and warfare, generations of historians haven't been able to
help but wonder what exactly Aristotle's influence was on Alexander --- to what
degree was Alexander's incredible talent at empire building a consequence of
the wisdom imparted to him by one of the greatest philosophers humanity
produced?  From what we can tell, Aristotle was keen on the idea of subjugating
Persia, so there was almost certainly some influence there, but I will leave it
to others to speculate about the details.

Well, Aristotle spent eight years in his homeland as a tutor to Alexander.  But
in 336 BC Philip II was assassinated during the feast at his daughter's
wedding, and Alexander ascended to kingship and so had no more need of book
learning.  So the next year in 335 BC Aristotle finally returned to Athens.
There he founded his own school.  Since he was a metic he couldn't buy land, so
he rented some buildings right next to a public exercise area dedicated to
Apollo Lykeios, meaning Apollo of the Wolves, and so the school came to be
known in Latin as the Lyceum.  And over time this moniker came to apply to
schools in general and, in fact, today, in French the word for high school is
lycée which ultimately derives from this Greek word for wolf.

Now it was Aristotle's habit to spend his mornings walking up and down the
walkway next to this exercise area with his students and discuss the more
abstruse points of philosophy with them.  Since they were always seen pacing up
and down, Aristotle's philosophical school became known as the Peripatetic
School.  In the afternoons Aristotle would settle down and teach in one spot to
a larger audience on subjects of broader interest, things like politics and
rhetoric.

The mode by which Aristotle operated his school was that a leader would be
elected to run the school for a 10 day period.  What that entailed was that the
leader would essentially have to stand his intellectual ground against any and
all comers.  Philosophers would ask for his opinion on a particular subject and
he would have to then defend his position against their objections.  This mode
of debate came to be of tremendous influence in Western civilization since
centuries later the medieval universities consciously mimicked this style,
where a professor would set forth a series of theses and be obligated to defend
them in debate against any objections that would be raised by the students.

Thanks to Aristotle's close relationship with Alexander the Great, the Lyceum
also became the first major library in ancient Greece.  According to one
account, Alexander granted him 800 talents to fund the library.  As always
converting these ancient units to modern currency is a dicey affair, but
nevertheless, this was a prodigious amount of money, somewhere in the hundreds
of millions of dollars today, so this was an extravagant collection.  And
calling it a library doesn't quite capture the extent of it, it was maybe more
like a museum, too, since it apparently also had a huge number of natural
specimens thanks to Aristotle's great interest in biology.  To help him acquire
these artifacts Alexander issued a proclamation throughout his empire that if
any hunters or fishermen or anyone else stumbled across something unusual, they
were to alert Aristotle so that he could collect the strange object for the
library.

What exactly came to be of this great library is not entirely known and what is
known is a long and winding story, too long and winding, believe it or not,
even for this podcast, but the contents of the library were passed down to a
succession of different men over the ages, some of whom were less scrupulous
and diligent than others and either lost works or allowed them to decay, and
ultimately it seems that they ended up in the hands of the Roman general Sulla
as booty after the Sack of Athens in 86 BC and he then probably auctioned off
whatever contents remained.

Aristotle remained at his school in Athens for 12 years, but in 323 BC his
patron Alexander died at the tender age of 32.  Suddenly all things were once
again possible politically and Athens became a dangerous place to be for a
Macedonian of his stature.  A pair of Athenian priests, Eurymedon and
Demophilus, jumped at the opportunity and tried to bring charges of impiety
against the philosopher, so, always looking out for number 1, Aristotle got out
of dodge while the getting out was still good.  He is said to have remarked
that he "saw no reason why Athens should be allowed to sin against philosophy
twice." He moved to the island of Chalcis, which is where his mother was from
and there died of natural causes the following year.

Well, it is generally thought that it was in those 12 years or so at the Lyceum
that Aristotle composed the works that he is known for today.  Aristotle's
surviving works are notorious for their difficulty and terseness.  But this
reputation seems to be an unfortunate accident of history.  Aristotle
apparently wrote a tremendous number of works, most of which did not survive.
They're broadly grouped into two categories, the so-called exoteric works and
the esoteric works.  The exoteric works were works intended for publication to
the general public, basically books and treatises.  The esoteric works, by
contrast, were essentially lecture notes and were just intended for use within
the school.  Not because they were secret, they were just rough and ready.
They were there if, say, some students were unable to attend a lecture and
would want to know what was discussed.  But by a cruel and improbable twist of
fate, all the works that were broadly published were lost, and only those of
limited circulation within the school survived.  So all of Aristotle's
surviving works are in this esoteric category, and none are in the exoteric
category.  This is quite the tragedy because Aristotle was apparently a
tremendously gifted writer.  Plato is seen as one of the greatest authors in
ancient Greece, but Cicero said that if Plato's writing was silver, then
Aristotle's was a river of gold.  But you wouldn't know it from what survived.

Now, all that said, relative to the other astronomers we've learned about so
far, really a tremendous number of works of Aristotle survive, around 31 in
all.  Maybe somewhat surprisingly, though, only two of these works survived
continuously in the West: Categories and On Interpretation.  The rest made
their way eastward sometime toward the end of Antiquity and were translated
into Arabic during the Islamic Golden Age at the tail end of the Early Middle
Age in the 9th through 11th centuries.  During the Crusades, Western scholars
came in contact with Islamic scholars and became acquainted with the rest of
Aristotle's surviving works and began a project of copying them into Latin in
the 11th through the 13th centuries.  The introduction of Aristotelian
philosophy into Europe had the effect of instigating an intellectual revolution
as scholars tried to reconcile these new ideas with Christian theology, with
St. Thomas of Aquinas being at the forefront of this effort.  But of course I
will have much more to say on this topic when the time comes because it was a
critical element in the development of science in Western Europe during the
Late Middle Ages.

Well, the vast majority of Aristotle's work deals with philosophy, and of
course we are not interested in philosophy on this podcast, only astronomy.
But because his astronomy was guided by his philosophy, it would be no good if
I didn't at least make an embarrassingly brief sketch of the character of his
philosophy.

Probably the most immediately striking feature of Aristotle's works is their
encyclopedic quality.  Now partly this is a consequence of the works which
happen to survive, but it is nevertheless clear that Aristotle was obsessed
with classifying things.  The major groupings of knowledge that we recognize
today, like logic, mathematics, biology, and so on, were set forth by him.  You
may recall in the episode about Plato that I had to provide a caveat that when
Plato uses a word like arithmetic or logic, it doesn't have the modern meaning.
But in most cases Aristotle's meaning is the same as the modern meaning, or
more correctly, the modern meaning of these subjects is the same as Aristotle's
because it came from Aristotle.

Now, this obsession with classifying things came from a deeper philosophical
conviction.  If you read virtually any philosopher, it won't be long before
you're reading about bizarre thought experiments like minds in vats and demons
altering your perception.  One of the perennial problems in philosophy is what
is known as the "problem of skepticism."  How can we be sure that we know
anything at all?  How do we know that everything we see is not an illusion?  I
believe myself to be at my desk speaking into a microphone right now, but maybe
I am really a brain in a vat and a mad scientist is feeding electrical signals
into my brain to trick me into thinking that I am speaking into a microphone
when in reality no microphone or mouth exists at all.  How would I know the
difference?  Descartes thought hard about this problem and famously asserted
that he could at least be sure of one thing, namely that he was conscious, and
then took it from there.  And the other greats down the ages from David Hume to
Soren Kierkegaard to Elizabeth Anscombe have all grappled with the problem in
various ways.

But Aristotle had no time for any of that nonsense.  To him, the senses were
basically dependable.  The point of philosophy was not to waste your time
worrying about whether or not your eyes were deceiving you, but to go out and
actually use your eyes and ears to actually learn something about the world
around you.  So he's a very practical sort of guy, especially for a great
philosopher.

This puts him in contrast with Plato.  Earlier on I said that when Aristotle
was studying from Plato at the Academy, he was initially an enthusiastic
supporter of his teacher, but came to have his doubts as the years passed.  You
may recall from Episode 15 that central to Plato's philosophy was the theory of
forms.  To put it a little simplistically, the forms existed in an ethereal
realm which contained the perfect versions of all things.  The reality around
us is just a pale shadow of the realm of the forms.  Although we can't see
them, to Plato, the forms were much more real than the stuff around us.  To
Plato, we had to be wary of the senses and could only rely on pure reasoning to
be sure that we were arriving at the truth.

Over the years Aristotle eventually came to the conclusion that this was
backwards.  To Aristotle, the realest things were in fact the stuff around us,
and when we saw it with our eyes, we more or less are seeing it as it really
is.  He essentially takes observations at face value which is a rather
refreshing characteristic in a philosopher.  The downside of his approach is
that it can lead him to be, shall we say, overconfident and at times even
downright gullible.  Now, Aristotle also held that forms existed, but to him,
they were sort of patterns that emerged from objects in the real world.  So the
form of the cat emerges from the pattern of the millions of real-life cats
across the world.  To Plato the form of the cat takes ontological precedence,
but to Aristotle this is not the case.  Things in the world exist at the
intersection of form and matter.  The relationship between the worldviews of
these two great Greek philosophers is on display allegorically in Raphael's
painting Philosophy, more commonly known as the School of Athens.  I'm sure
you've seen it, it's the famous Renaissance era painting of a bunch of
philosophers standing around in a great forum talking to each other.  Well
front and center, Raphael places Plato and Aristotle.  Plato has his right arm
raised up to the heavens to indicate the primacy of the forms, and Aristotle
has his arm outstretched to indicate the primacy of objects in the world.

Well, to start to steer this ship towards astronomy, one of the central
characteristics of Aristotle's philosophy is that it is highly teleological.
We don't often come across the word teleology today because it's a somewhat
unfashionable idea in the modern world.  But teleology is all about an innate
direction towards some final purpose.  A teleological explanation for a thing's
behavior is that it is in the nature of that thing to behave in the way that it
does because the end state was in some sense its goal, its purpose for
existing.  So, in Aristotle's philosophy, rocks fall towards the ground because
it is in the nature of the element Earth to sink to the center of the universe.
Now, put this way it seems a little circular or simplistic, but it is easy to
slip into teleological explanations even if we think we know better.  In a
modern context they oftentimes crop up in evolutionary explanations.  We might
say something like "giraffes evolved long necks so that they could eat the
leaves at the tops of trees."  But as a Darwinian explanation this is
fundamentally wrong.  Giraffes never evolved long necks *for* any particular
purpose.  Over the millennia giraffes were born with necks of all sorts of
lengths, and those who happened to be born with longer necks had an easier time
eating more leaves and reproduced more so over time more and more giraffes
ended up being born with long necks.  But that is fundamentally a different
sort of explanation than saying that they evolved long necks in order to eat
leaves at the tops of trees.  One is an explanation of natural selection, the
other is a teleological explanation, saying that the evolution occurred in
order to achieve some purpose.  The teleological explanation can often be a
helpful shorthand for the real natural selection explanation, but we need to
keep in the back of our mind that it's not the real explanation.

I think in some ways teleology has been rather unfairly maligned in modern
times.  We can also talk about modern physics in a somewhat teleological
manner.  An extremely powerful formulation of classical mechanics uses what is
called the principle of least action.  You can define a quantity called the
action, and you will find that a system always behaves in such a way as to
minimize this quantity, or strictly speaking for the pedants, it will find an
extremum of this quantity.  Well why does the action get minimized?  Well, it's
not really a question of physics anymore.  We can't really give a more
satisfying explanation than that it is just in the innate nature of things to
behave that way.  Now you can derive the principle of least action from
Newton's laws of motions, but that just begs the question --- why does matter
obey Newton's laws?  Modern physics tells us that it is in the inherent nature
of bodies to obey Newton's laws or to minimize the action, and Aristotelian
physics tells us that it is in the inherent nature of the element Earth to fall
to the center of the universe.

Now, before we can really get into his astronomy we do have to flesh out his
physics somewhat because his ideas on matter and motion really did inform his
astronomy.  At a high level, Aristotle's physics had two components: matter and
motion.  His theory of matter was fairly straightforward: he more or less
adopted Empedocles's theory of the four elements.  There are four fundamental
elements: earth, water, air, and fire.  All matter around us is composed of
these four elements in varying degrees.  But, for reasons I'll get to
momentarily, Aristotle also added in a fifth element, called aether, which only
existed in the heavens.  Now, Aristotle fleshed out Empedocles's theory a
little bit by drawing out two axes.  There was the hot-cold axis, and the
dry-moist axis.  So fire is hot and dry, air is hot and moist (think of it
being more like steam), water is cold and moist, and earth is cold and dry.
Now according to Aristotle the pure versions of these elements are not
necessarily our ordinary experience interacting with these elements.  So a
flame is not in fact pure fire.  Pure fire does not have a flame, the flame
only comes about due to the proximity of the fire to a moist element like air.
In fact as a general principle, no matter we actually interact with can be
completely pure --- all four elements are always present, just in different
proportions.  These two axes, hot-cold and dry-moist also form their own axis
of active vs. passive.  The hot-cold axis is active and the dry-moist axis is
passive.  So the quality of dryness or wetness in an element is acted upon by
the heat or cold of another element.  But because each element has qualities
along both axes --- because it is hot or cold *and* dry or wet, each element
has both active and passive qualities.  This means that every element has the
ability to act upon every other element and be acted upon by every other
element.  This then puts in place the prerequisites for dynamics, for a theory
of motion.

Now Aristotle's theory of motion is very different than the theory of motion of
Galileo and Newton that developed during the seventeenth century, and, as a
consequence, quite unlike the ideas around motion that we are used to today.
But although Aristotle's ideas around motion sound strange to those of us who
have learned some basic physics, the only reason this is the case is that the
first thing any basic physics class will do is try to beat out of you your
intuitions around motion.  The benefit of Aristotle's theory of motion is that,
unless you've already had your intuitions beat out of you, it is extremely
intuitive, which is probably a big reason why it persisted as the dominant
theory of motion for several centuries in Europe after Aristotle's work was
introduced around the 12th and 13th centuries.  To Aristotle there are two
fundamental kinds of motion: linear motion and circular motion.  Linear motion
is the kind of motion inherent to the matter around us on Earth.  Anything
composed of the four elements earth, water, air, and fire, will naturally move
in a straight line.  But this motion is necessarily finite because Aristotle
believed that the universe is finite in size for reasons that I'll get to.  If
you set an object in motion in a straight line, it couldn't go along that
straight line forever because eventually it would bump into the edge of the
universe and could go no further.  So any ordinary matter would naturally move
for a while in a straight line and then slow down and stop.  And of course this
looks to be in good agreement with what we observe around us.  If you push a
rock to the side, it'll stop moving when you stop pushing it, and the heavier
the rock the quicker it'll stop.  If you start walking and suddenly stop moving
your legs, you don't just magically keep moving forward.  Without any effort on
your part, you stop moving.

Now Aristotle argued that a consequence of this is that to move an object
continuously, something needs to be in continuous contact with it to push it
along, otherwise it would stop since that's its natural state.  This might seem
a little weird --- if I throw a baseball it seems to move through the air all
on its own --- I'm not pushing it the whole way through the air with my hand
until it reaches the catcher's glove.  But according to Aristotle what is
actually happening here is that as you throw the ball, you create a disturbance
in the air around the ball, and this disturbance propagates in such a way that
the air surrounding the ball ends up pushing the ball forward.  Presumably if
you tried throwing a ball in a vacuum, it wouldn't move forward at all, but
that's an absurd thought experiment for Aristotle anyway because he didn't
believe that it was possible for a vacuum to exist.

So the four elements tend to move in straight lines, but they have different
destinations.  Earth and water both tend to move toward the center of the
universe whereas air and fire tend to move away from it.  Furthermore, earth
has a stronger tendency to move towards the center than water does, and fire
has a stronger tendency to move away from the center of the universe than air
does.  This is why the ocean and rivers and lakes sit on top of the Earth and
why fire rises up through the air.

So that in a nutshell is how motion works for one of the two kinds of
fundamental motion, linear motion.  But according to Aristotle there is a
second kind of fundamental motion which is circular motion.  We can clearly see
that objects around us behave in one way, you drop a ball and it always falls
straight back down to Earth.  But the celestial objects do not behave in the
same way.  They perpetually move in circles around the Earth.  Since the
natural motion for the four terrestrial elements is linear, there must be a
fifth element that inherently has a circular kind of motion.  Aristotle calls
this fifth element aether.  Unlike linear motion, circular motion is eternal
because it never runs into any constraints.  Once a planet or star returns to
the same point of the circle everything is exactly the same as it was when it
began and the motion repeats.  So the stars move around the Earth in circles
and will continue to move around the Earth indefinitely.

This fifth element aether was different than the others not only in the quality
of its motion.  It also didn't possess the qualities of heaviness or lightness.
And it was superior to the other elements, both in a sort of normative sense of
just being a better element, but also literally in a physical sense in that it
existed above the other elements.  The higher you went in the universe, the
more the universe was dominated by aether.  This identification of a sort of
normative character with a physical location in space is very characteristic of
Aristotle's philosophy, though it was by no means unique to it.  Lots of
ancient cultures have had the idea of sacred locations and an intuition that
higher places were closer to God or the gods --- think of Moses receiving the
Law from God on Mt. Sinai or the place of Mt.  Fuji as a sacred location in
Shintoism or Mauna Kea as a location where the gods of the Hawaiians dwelled,
or in Ancient Greece, Mt. Olympus, which was both a physical mountain and the
mythical dwelling place of the Greek gods.

According to Aristotle, the boundary between the heavens and the terrestrial
realm was the sphere of the moon.  So everything we know in our everyday life
belongs to the sublunary realm.  The Moon is the first of the heavenly spheres
that contains the element aether, but it also contains a good deal of earth as
well.  As you get to more distant spheres the proportion of aether increases.

This then fits in very nicely with Aristotle's theory of planetary motion.  The
natural tendency of the terrestrial elements is toward stasis whereas the
natural tendency of the aether is circular motion.  The most distant sphere,
the fixed stars, contains aether almost exclusively, so its motion is perfectly
circular.  For Saturn, there is a higher proportion of the terrestrial
elements, so there is now a combination of linear and circular motions, so
Saturn's motion is somewhat more complicated.  Jupiter has even more
terrestrial elements so its motion is more complicated still, and Mars even
more so.  But by the time you get down to the Sun and the Moon, the general
tendency of the terrestrial elements towards stasis tends to dampen their
motion, so they return to relatively simple, mostly circular motions.

Aristotle thought that Eudoxus's model of homocentric spheres was essentially
correct and adapted most of Callippus's embellishments.  You may recall from
Episode 16 about Eudoxus that it's not entirely clear how literally he believed
his theory.  Was it a physical model of the universe or was it just a
mathematical device to predict the positions of the planets?  But with
Aristotle there's no question at all.  He believed his model of the planets to
be a literal, physical model of spheres rotating in space.

Now, because Aristotle wanted a physical model he realized that there were some
problems if he just used Callippus's model right out of the box.  Take a planet
like Jupiter.  It has four spheres to describe its motion: one for its daily
rising and setting, one for its roughly 12 year motion through the zodiac, and
then another two to explain the fact that sometimes it was a little ahead of
where it was supposed to be in the zodiac and sometimes it was a little behind.
In this model, you have these four spheres nested inside of each other and the
poles of one sphere are attached to some point on the sphere right outside it.
Okay, that's all fine, but what is the outermost sphere attached to?  The
sphere outside it is Saturn, and Saturn has its own complicated motion, totally
independent of Jupiter!  If the outermost sphere is attached to one of Saturn's
spheres, you would see the motion of Jupiter be the superposition of this
normal motion I've described plus the motion of Saturn.  And what about Mars?
Mars's outermost sphere would then be attached to Jupiter's sphere, so Mars's
motion would be even more complex because it would be the superposition of
Mars's motion plus Jupiter's motion plus Saturn's motion.  By the time you got
to the Moon it's motion would look totally chaotic since it would be the
superposition of the rotations of 34 spheres.

Aristotle's idea to fix this was in the same vein as Callippus --- just add
more spheres.  His basic idea was that in between, say, Jupiter and Saturn,
there would be an extra set of three spheres, called reacting spheres.  Each of
these spheres would just rotate in the opposite direction of one of the spheres
of Saturn in order to cancel out its motion.  Then the lowest of these spheres
would have the same rotation as the fixed stars.  Then you could attached the
outermost sphere of Jupiter to that sphere as normal.

Now it's clear from his statements that Aristotle was not a geometer on the
level of Eudoxus because later authors noticed that he made a few elementary
mistakes in his theory.  Since all the spheres are attached to the outermost
sphere of the fixed stars, he didn't need a sphere associated with each planet
to produce the daily rising and setting.  The outermost sphere would do just
fine.  So he had six extra spheres in his model that he didn't need.  Also, to
be perfectly consistent, he should have added three extra spheres beneath the
Moon to cancel out the Moon's motion because according to Aristotle features
like comets and meteors belong to the realm just beneath the Moon.  But since
comets clearly rotate with the fixed stars the lowest sphere has to rotate with
the fixed stars, too, which means you need three spheres to cancel out the
motion from the Moon's sphere.

Well unlike Eudoxus, Aristotle's astronomy goes well beyond just a model of
planetary motion.  One of the reasons that Aristotle became so influential in
Europe in the Middle Ages was that his astronomy was really quite
comprehensive.  Almost any astronomical question you could think of, he had an
opinion on it.  Why do the stars shine, for example?  To Aristotle the element
of aether is not visible.  The stars are made of aether, but as they move
through the heavens, they displace air and fire and this displacement causes a
visible burning.

He had an extensive cosmology, too.  He believed, in contrast to some of the
earlier philosophers, that there was only a single universe.  His argument for
this was almost tautological.  In essence, any matter necessarily had to be a
part of the universe.  The natural place of matter was within the universe,
there is Aristotle's teleology again.  If you wanted to move anything outside
of the universe, you'd have to use some force to do so since it's currently a
part of the universe.  But remember that in Aristotle's physics the only way to
apply force is through direct contact.  So if one piece of matter was to push
another piece of matter outside of the universe, that piece of matter would
have to be outside the universe as well.  So something would have to be outside
the universe first, but this isn't the case, so everything must be inside the
one universe.  Now, I'd say that it's a rhetorically slick argument, but maybe
not an especially convincing one for moderners.

Aristotle also believed that the universe was finite in size.  He had a few
justifications for this stance.  One was essentially just intuition.  He felt
that infinities in general caused all sorts of trouble, which, to be fair, they
do, but at least to us moderners we don't see that as being a good enough
reason to reject them out of hand.  But, he argued that if the universe were
infinitely large, this would mean that the stars were infinitely far away, and
this would mean that they would rotate infinitely fast, which he regarded as
absurd.  Another serious problem with an infinite universe is that it had no
center.  But clearly the Earth is the center of the universe, which we can see
because water and the element earth always move toward it, so the universe had
to be finite in size.

The universe also had to be spherical in shape.  After all, it clearly rotates,
but if it had some other shape, say, a cube, then the corners would be in one
place now and in another place a little while later.  But what exactly are the
corners rotating *into*?  After all, the universe contains all the space there
is.  There's no other space for the corners of the universe to rotate into.  So
if the universe were not spherical it would not be able to rotate.  But since
we do observe it to rotate it must be spherical.  Now Aristotle actually made a
subtle mistake here because this argument, clever though it is, isn't quite
right.  It's possible to have shapes other than spheres that can rotate without
occupying any more space.  Any solid of revolution would work, not just a
sphere.  A prolate or oblate spheroid where the distance between the north and
south celestial poles is different than the distance to the celestial equator
would also be perfectly valid.  But Aristotle had deeper aesthetic reasons for
preferring spheres since the heavens, with their outermost reaches, the fixed
stars, in particular, being the highest, most incorruptible realm, they
therefore had to be associated with the most perfect shape, which was the
sphere.

Well Aristotle also reasons about the shape of the Earth and concludes that it,
too, is spherical.  On this question he really collected all the results at the
cutting edge of astronomical research of his day.  One argument he points to is
that during a lunar eclipse the shadow cast by the Earth is always curved no
matter the orientation of the shadow.  If the Earth were a disc or some other
shape, you would expect that its shadow would sometimes be curved, but other
times might be flat or some other shape.  But we never see that.  No matter how
many lunar eclipses we see, the shadow is always curved, even though sometimes
it's on the lower side of the moon, sometimes on the upper side, sometimes to
the left and sometimes to the right.  The only way the Earth can cast a curved
shadow no matter its orientation with respect to the Moon and Sun is if it is
spherical.

But, as is typical of Aristotle, he tried not to rely on a single argument for
his position.  He also noted that the sky appears slightly different depending
on your latitude.  Different stars are visible on the southern horizon in
Egypt, in particular Canopus, the second brightest star in the night sky.  And
some stars in northern Greece always stay above the horizon but rise and set at
lower latitudes.  Aristotle concluded that this not only meant that the Earth
was spherical, but that it couldn't even be all that large, since the distances
people could travel could noticeably change the appearance of the sky.  Now,
Aristotle wasn't the first to realize this, we saw back in Episode 16 that
Eudoxus had also pointed this out.  And Aristotle actually cites the work of
some people he calls "the mathematicians," who had actually used this fact to
try to estimate the size of the Earth and had arrived at a circumference of
400,000 stades.  This is the first quantitative estimate of the size of the
Earth that we know of.  Now, unfortunately, the length of a stade isn't known
precisely, but it's generally believed to have been a bit more than 150 meters
though it could have been closer to 200.  In modern terms this implies that by
the time of Aristotle the Greeks had estimated the circumference of the Earth
to be about 60,000 km, which is about 50% larger than its true value of 40,000
km.  So, by modern standards this wasn't an incredibly accurate measurement,
but it's still impressive that the mathematicians, whoever they were, were very
much in the ballpark of understanding roughly how large the Earth was.  As
we'll see in a future episode, within about a century Eratosthenes had vastly
improved the accuracy of this measurement.

Well Aristotle wasn't content to rely only on empirical measurements.  He also
provided a few physical arguments as to why the Earth had to be a sphere.
Aristotle argued that if the Earth wasn't a sphere, the heavier bits of matter
on the extremities would push aside lighter matter until the Earth arrived at a
spherical shape.  The spherical shape was just a natural consequence of his
physics --- the element Earth tended towards the center of the universe, so
things would shuffle around until all parts of the Earth were equidistant from
the universe's center.  And from a modern perspective this argument isn't all
that far off from the truth.  His theory of motion was all wrong, but it is at
least similar to the modern picture that physical systems find the state of
lowest energy and a sphere happens to be the lowest energy state because all
parts are equidistant from the center.

Now we've heard form a few astronomers in the last few episodes who all held
that the Earth is a sphere.  But this doesn't seem to have been the only
opinion among astronomers of the day.  Some had pointed to the fact that when
the Sun sets, it is cut directly in half by the horizon.  If the Earth were
really round the Sun would form a sort of crescent as it sets.  But Aristotle
says that it just looks this way because the Sun and the horizon are so far
away from us that the horizon looks flat instead of curved.  This is maybe one
of the few cases where Aristotle rejects the direct observation of his senses.

One other consequence of his theory of motion was that it implied that the
Earth did not rotate.  After all the Earth was composed of the element earth,
and the natural tendency of all four terrestrial elements was to move in
straight lines until they slowed to a stop.  If you let go of a rock it falls
straight down and settles to a stop as close to the center of the universe as
it can get, there is no circular motion.  Since the planet Earth is nothing
more than a big blob of this element, all its parts, too, would fall straight
down and settle as close to the center of the universe as they could get, so
there would be no rotation.  Even if, in the distant past, the heavenly spheres
had imparted some circular motion to the Earth, that motion would have
eventually died away because its not in the nature of the element earth to move
in a circle.

Aristotle also thought carefully about other properties of the universe that we
might today find a little strange.  He spends a while wondering about whether
or not the universe has a left or right side.  Now, today we might see this as
being kind of an odd question.  Aristotle believed the universe to be spherical
and how can a sphere have a left or right side?  But Aristotle's reasoning went
like this.  He said that there are three dimensions and we can call those
up-down, front-back, and left-right.  So a left-right axis exists in some sense
but the question is can we define it uniquely?  Now to Aristotle the axis about
which the universe rotated was clearly the up-down axis.  Furthermore he
asserts that the right side has the quality of the beginning of motion ---
things inherently move from the right to the left --- here again is that good
old Aristotelian teleology.  The stars rise in the east, so the east must be
the right side.  Now we have to imagine lying on the ground --- in Greece of
course --- with our head towards the north pole and our feet towards the
equator.  If we do this, the east will be on our left and the west on our
right, so we'll see that the stars rise on our left side and move toward our
right side.  Now in modern English we would be perfectly content with calling
this motion "to the right," but at least in Aristotle's Greek this does not
work.  He calls this motion to the left.  But because Aristotle already
established that the right had the inherent property of the beginning of
motion, this means something is wrong.  So the only way he could reconcile this
was to say that the problem is that you are oriented wrong.  The problem is
that you have laid down with your head towards the north and your feet towards
the south.  If you turn around so that your head is towards the south pole and
your feet are towards the north pole, everything will be fine.  What this means
then is that, contrary to the way we normally represent globes, the south pole
is in the up direction and the north pole is in the down direction.  Then the
east direction is the right and the west direction is the left, and everything
is as it should be.

So we see in Aristotle's astronomy a curious blend of reasoning about
properties of the universe some of which strike us as really quite modern and
other arguments that sound like they came from a crackpot.  On the one hand
his arguments about the spherical shape of the Earth are generally sound and
the size he quotes is really not too far off from the truth.  But then you have
this strange discussion about whether or not the universe has a left or right
side that ultimately hinges on his own personal opinions about whether motion
originates from the left or the right.

Well Aristotle also writes a great deal about phenomena which he did not
consider to be astronomical in nature, but which we do today, namely the nature
of comets, meteors, and the Milky Way.  He doesn't really talk about these
phenomena in his main work on astronomy De Caelo, On the Heavens, but instead
in a separate book called Meteorology.  The title of that book gives some
indication of how he thought about these phenomena.  To him, comets, meteors,
and the Milky Way were things high up in the atmosphere, but beneath the sphere
of the Moon.  Since they were in the sublunary realm, they did not contain that
special fifth element aether, but were fundamentally terrestrial phenomena just
like the weather is.  In fact, if you've ever wondered why meteorology is the
study of weather and not, well, meteors, the truth is that when Aristotle
coined it it was the study of meteors.  The Greek word meteor just means "high
up in the air", so meteorology is the study of things high up in the air, which
to him meant clouds and rain and wind, but also comets and meteors.

As is typical of Aristotle before giving his explanation of what comets and
meteors were he went through the opinions of other astronomers and knocked them
down one by one.  You might remember that Anaxagoras and Democritus held that
comets were the conjunctions of two planets.  But Aristotle says that this
clearly cannot be the case since otherwise we would only see comets in the
zodiac and frequently we see them outside of it.  Other astronomers had argued
that what we thought were comets was actually just another planet, but we just
don't see it very often because it's usually too low on the horizon like
Mercury is.  But Aristotle said that this also can't be the case because
sometimes we see two comets at the same time.

To Aristotle the mechanism that produced comets was the same that produced
meteors.  Every now and again a puff of dry air rises up from the Earth in what
Aristotle calls an "exhalation" and contacts the Moon's sphere.  The rapid
motion of the Moon's sphere rubbing against the pocket of air then ignites it,
producing a burst.  Depending on the qualities of this puff of air, how warm or
cold it was, it would ignite differently.  So sometimes it produces a short
burst, other times a pocket of cold air gets squeezed out and propelled in one
direction which causes a bright streak in the sky which we would see as a
meteor.  But, if the properties of the puff of air are just right, which
doesn't happen very often, it will produce a slow, steady burn and this we
observe as a comet.  Now a corollary of Aristotle's theory of comets is that
because they are produced by these hot, dry exhalations, they are more common
when the weather is dry and windy, so comets are a warning of potential drought
to come.

Actually, though, Aristotle identified two types of comets: sublunary comets
and superlunary comets.  These slow, steady burns of pockets of air hitting up
against the lunar sphere are the sublunary comets.  But occasionally a star
itself can produce one of these puffs of air, which then glows due to the rapid
motion of the spheres and follows the star around like a kind of halo.  Now, on
this point, the terse, dense Greek of Aristotle's writing really bites us
because he seems to say that the puff of air, and therefore the comet itself,
is still in the sublunary realm, but just follows the star around.
Specifically he says "when the exhalation is constituted by one of the fixed
stars or the planets, owing to their motion, one of them becomes a comet."  But
he doesn't explain the mechanism of how the star "constitutes" exhalation and
how the exhalation follows it around.

Now in the Middle Ages, St. Thomas Aquinas wrote a commentary on Aristotle's
Meteorology among other works and interpreted Aristotle's explanation of
superlunary comets as being exhalations that happened to collect underneath a
star and weren't really due to any change in the star itself.  This
interpretation was necessary in medieval European cosmology where the
superlunary realm, the heavens, were held to be absolutely unchanging.  This
was why Tycho Brahe's observation of a new star in the sky in 1572, which we
now know to have been a supernova, was so revolutionary.  If this new object
was in fact in the superlunary realm, it indicated that the superlunary realm
was not unchanging after all.  But I think that this rather absolutist
viewpoint seems to have been more a medieval position than it necessarily was
Aristotle's own opinion.  As far as I can tell, Aristotle was not explicit in
saying that the heavens were absolutely unchanging.  Aristotle did believe, for
instance, that the some amount of the earth element was present in the
superlunary realm, it was just highly diluted and the dominant form of matter
was the aether.  But in his physics if the element Earth was present, some
amount of change should be possible.  And in the case of superlunary comets,
his wording really does suggest that the cause of the comet ultimately is in
something that happens from the star itself, which seems to indicate that
something in the superlunary realm has to change, even if he doesn't say
exactly what.

Well, Aristotle also assigns the location of the Milky Way to the sublunary
realm as well and basically gives the same mechanism for its formation as for
the formation of comets.  Just as sometimes individual stars can form
superlunary comets by collecting matter in the right constitution in the upper
atmosphere that then ignites upon contact with the moving sphere of the Moon, a
large group of stars collectively can also have this effect in a more permanent
kind of way across a broad region of the sky.

Okay, well I have attempted to at least touch on the major features of
Aristotle's astronomy, but again, given the extent of his writing and
influence, even though this has been one of the longest episodes yet it's still
a fairly superficial exposition of his astronomy, and a laughably cursory
exposition of the rest of his philosophy.  But never fear, as I've alluded to,
many of the basic features of his astronomy came to dominate Western thought
during the high and late middle ages, so when, in a decade or two, this podcast
finally arrives at that era, we'll be able to explore the implications of this
worldview in more depth.  In particular, one bit that I had to skip over in the
interest of time has to do with the concept of the cosmogony of the unmoved
mover, which he invoked to explain the motion of the outermost sphere of the
fixed stars, and which was enthusiastically embraced by St. Thomas Aquinas as
evidence for the existence of God.  But all that will have to wait for the
future.

Aristotle is an especially interesting figure because, on the one hand he has
had more influence on Western intellectual life than almost anyone else, and on
the other hand, his reputation has see-sawed over the ages.  He was, of course,
respected in his day, but was rather neglected at the close of antiquity and in
the Early Middle Ages when all but two of his works were unknown in the West.
After his works came into the West via Arabia, his philosophy became all the
rage.  St. Thomas Aquinas simply calls him "The Philosopher."  But in the
Renaissance, humanist scholars rejected what they felt was the stifling
nitpicking that characterized Scholasticism, which was the philosophy that
developed out of Aristotelianism.  The roller coaster of his reputation went up
again in the Enlightenment and the 19th century as scholars started to focus
more on his work in biology and political philosophy.  But then his reputation
came crashing back down in the 20th century as the intellectual currents once
again drifted against him and he was seen as having instituted an orthodoxy
that stifled innovation and creative scientific thought for centuries.  Were it
not for Aristotle, many 20th century thinkers mused, how much sooner the
scientific revolution would have got going and by now we would all have flying
cars on Mars.

Well, regardless of how dogmatically later thinkers adopted his astronomy, it
is certainly the case that without Aristotle we would know much less about
Greek astronomy than we do because many of the ideas of earlier astronomers
only survive because Aristotle was thoughtful enough to write them down so that
he could prove them wrong.  So as historians of science we have no choice but
to show him some gratitude.

Aristotle in many ways marks a turning point.  His career lasted through the
tail end of the Classical Era of Ancient Greece.  He died just one year after
the death of Alexander the Great, which traditionally marks the start of the
Hellenistic Era.  So now we will start to turn to the astronomers of that era.
One of the consequences of Alexander's conquests was that there was far more
interaction between the Near East and Greece.  So while we have heard
innumerable stories of Greeks travelling to Egypt or Babylon and learning
astronomy there, in the Hellenistic Era, along with the Roman Era, Greek
astronomers start to gain access to Babylonian astronomical records which were
an incomparable treasure trove of data for Greek astronomers trying to model
planetary motions.  But that will be a tale for another full moon.  I hope
you'll join me then.  Until the next full moon, good night, and clear skies.

## Additional references

* Sir David Ross, Aristotle
* Henry Babcock Veatch, Aristotle: A Contemporary Appreciation
