---
categories: episode
date: '2022-03-22'
description: Before leaving the world of the Pre-Socratics, we look briefly at the
  astronomy of Oenopides, which had a more observational character than many of his
  contemporaries. Then we turn to Plato, the first of the great astronomers in the
  Socratic tradition, whose astronomy synthesized the best ideas of his predecessors.
keywords:
- astronomy
- history
- greece
- plato
layout: episode
number: 15
title: On Plato's Broad Shoulders
---

## Transcript

Good evening and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon.  My
name is Joe Antognini.

Well, over the last eight episodes, I have tried to lead you, dear listener,
through the development of Greek astronomical thought, starting with the
mythological and poetic cosmologies expressed by Homer and Hesiod, along with
the variety of Greek myths, and then moving through the philosophers of the
first philosophical school in ancient Greece, the Ionian School.  As Miletus
came to occupy a more important position in Greek culture, the ideas of the
Ionian philosophers came to spread to other Greek colonies and we traced the
development of other schools of philosophy, the Pythagoreans, the Eleatics,
and, in the last episode, the atomists.  These are all philosophers which have
been scandalously lumped together as the "pre-Socratics", but, despite the
title of this episode, there is one last pre-Socratic astronomer whom I would
be remiss to omit before we make that irreversible leap out of the realm of the
pre-Socratics.  So, my apologies for the bait and switch, but before we get to
the main subject of this episode, Plato, I want to talk briefly about an
astronomer by the name of Oenopides of Chios.  Oenopides doesn't neatly fit
into any of the schools that we've followed in the past eight episodes, so at
least in this telling, he is something of an appendix to the broader narrative.
But, he made several important discoveries and was influential among ancient
Greek astronomers so it is worth spending a few minutes to recount his greatest
hits.

We don't know very much about Oenopides's life, basically just that he was
active in the middle of the fifth century BC, probably living from around 490
to 420 BC, so roughly contemporaneous with Anaxagoras and Leucippus and living
right during the time that Athens was becoming a political and cultural
powerhouse in ancient Greece.  Oenopides was born on the island of Chios, but
not much is known for certain about his subsequent whereabouts.  There is a
tale which by know I'm sure you're familiar with that he traveled to Egypt and
there learned the secrets of astronomy and mathematics from the Egyptian
priests.  And he probably spent some time in Athens as well.  But apart from
that there is really nothing more to say about his life.

So all that does survive are his astronomical and mathematical discoveries.  Of
his astronomical discoveries there are two of note that have come down to us.
The first of these is the "discovery" of what is called the obliquity of the
ecliptic.  Now, one of the disadvantages of conveying this information in
podcast form is that you cannot see the air quotes around the word "discovery."
Because the obliquity of the ecliptic was at this time well known to the
Babylonians, as well as the Indians and Chinese, and, in fact, later on the
Egyptian priests, apparently anxious to maintain their priority in this
discovery, claimed that Oenopides had learned of the obliquity of the ecliptic
from them.  But he was the first of the Greeks to notice this.  The phrase
"obliquity of the ecliptic" will come up again and again over the course of
this podcast series so we had better get to know it, but it's just an overly
fancy way of saying that the ecliptic, the path that the Sun takes across the
background stars over the course of a year, is tilted with respect to the
direction that the stars rotate every night.  In our modern model of the solar
system this is at root due to the fact that the Earth's axis of rotation is
tilted with respect to its orbit around the Sun by an angle of about 23 and a
half degrees.  This tilt gives us the seasons since the Sun is higher in the
sky in the northern latitudes during the summer and lower in the sky during the
winter.

Now, on the one hand if you are tracking the positions of the Sun and planets
with any sort of attention, this is not an especially difficult observation to
make.  Measuring the exact angle of the ecliptic with respect to the motion of
the background stars is a little more difficult, but just noticing that there
is an angle doesn't take too much work.  But that said, at this point in the
podcast, nine episodes into Greek astronomy, you will probably have noticed
that Greek astronomers up to now were not all that interested in anything more
than a cursory observation of the heavens.  They got their kicks debating with
each other about the fundamental nature of matter and how the universe was
created.  I specifically tried to highlight occasions where they pointed to
physical evidence, like Xenophanes noticing that there were seashells up on
mountains, because these were the exception rather than the rule.  But, unlike
many of his contemporaries, Oenopides bothered to look up at the heavens and
note carefully what he saw.  We could plausibly make the case that he was the
first observational astronomer of ancient Greece.

Now, it seems that Oenopides did not really go any further with this discovery
than noticing that the ecliptic was inclined with respect to the celestial
equator.  There isn't any evidence that he went so far as to actually measure
what that angle was.  But, later authors, who are the only ones who preserved
Oenopides's work for posterity, stated that other astronomers, unnamed of
course, had later gone and measured this angle and found it to be 24 degrees.
Actually, these authors did not put things in a way that is quite so clear to
us moderners.  What they really said was that this angle was given by the angle
subtended by the side of a regular pentadecagon inscribed in a circle, and this
angle happens to be 24 degrees.  In fact, if you read Euclid's Elements, Book 4
goes through methods to construct various regular polygons.  Euclid
demonstrates a method to construct a square, a four sided polygon; a pentagon,
a five-sided polygon; and a hexagon, a six-sided polygon.  Then he jumps all
the way up to the pentadecagon, a 15-sided polygon and that's the last polygon
he shows you how to construct.  It's speculated here that Euclid highlights the
construction of the pentadecagon in particular due to its importance for
astronomy since its internal angle of 24 degrees approximated the observed
obliquity of the ecliptic.

Oenopides was also noted for one other result which is his measurement of the
Great Year.  Now, a great Year has various meanings in astronomy and so is
pretty context dependent, but the underlying idea is that the motions of the
Sun, Moon, planets, and stars all repeat with different periods, and over long
enough times these cycles all eventually repeat themselves.  So, you could make
the case that the Saros Cycle that the Babylonians discovered is a sort of
Great Year.  You might recall that this is a period of about 18 years after
which eclipses roughly recur.

Well Oenopides's Great Year was 59 regular years.  Unfortunately the later
authors who recorded Oenopides's work didn't actually explain why he arrived at
59 years, so modern historians of astronomy have had to do some reverse
engineering to work out what this number was supposed to represent.  The basic
idea is that if you assume a year to be 365 days and a lunar month to be 29 1/2
days, both of which are decent approximations, then you will find that 59 years
is exactly 720 lunar months.  So this is the smallest amount of time it takes
to get an integer number of lunar months to fit in an integer number of years.
After a Great Year you'll find that the same lunar phases happen at the same
time of the year.

Now, it seems that Oenopides went a little further than this, too, and tried to
use his Great Year to measure the length of the regular year more accurately.
To get at his initial guess of the Great Year he started with the assumption
that the year is exactly 365 days.  But of course we know that it's closer to
365 and a quarter which is why we add leap days once every four years, or
almost every four years anyway.  So Oenopides very likely looked at calendrical
data to see how many months had actually occurred in 59 years since new months
happened at the new moons.  From this he found that in this 59 year period,
there had been 21,557 days instead of the 21,535 days which you would have
gotten if the year were exactly 365 days long.  Then he just divided that
number of days by 59 and concluded that the year was 365 days and 22/59 of a
day, or about 365.37 days long.  This is a bit of an overestimate, but is
closer to the true value of about 365.24 days than 365 was exactly.

Now I'll qualify this once more by saying that this is all reverse engineered.
We know that he said that the Great Year is 59 years and that the length of the
year is 365 days and 22/59ths.  But the methodology is essentially reverse
engineered to figure out how he could have arrived at those numbers.

Well, Oenopides's work wasn't limited to astronomy.  He was apparently a very
talented geometer as well.  It's believed that two proofs in Euclid's Elements
were first discovered by him.  One of these is Proposition 12 which asks how to
draw a line that is perpendicular to a given line and passes through a given
point.  And, probably even more influential than that was his rule that the
only instruments allowed in geometry were the straightedge and compass.  So you
could draw a line between two points and draw a circle around a point, but you
could not do anything else like break out a ruler or a protractor when trying
to square a circle or trisect an angle.  This rule became codified in the
axioms of Euclid's Elements, and from thereon, for millennia, geometry became
synonymous with straightedge and compass constructions.

Well, those are, in sum, the highlights of Oenopides's professional work.  And
we can see that his work is really quite different in its overall character
from the other Greek philosophers I've discussed to date.  Rather than being
the last of the pre-Socratics, as I've presented him here, he really fits in
more as a herald of the astronomy to come about a century later.  Rather than
speculating on the nature of matter and telling tales about how the universe
was formed, Oenopides's astronomy feels rather more hard-headed and a bit
closer to what we call science today.  He was observing things and making
calculations.  Now, I don't want to get too carried away here and claim that
Oenopides was the first true scientist or something like that.  He retained
some of the mythological character of the astronomy of his day.  He posed an
explanation of the Milky Way that the Sun originally moved through the Milky
Way.  But, then there happens an event that involves yet another figure, in
this case Atreus, killing someone's sons, and then serving them during a feast
to the unsuspecting father, in this case Thyestes.  After seeing this, the Sun
became so appalled that it changed its path in the sky, leaving the Milky Way
as a remnant of where it had once gone.  So in this history of Greek astronomy
we now have come across cannibal feasts on three separate occasions.  I will
leave it to a Freudian psychologist to attempt to comment on what it says about
the Greek psyche that this kind of story shows up with this frequency in Greek
history and mythology.

Anyhow, all this is to say that while the flavor of Oenopides's astronomy is
overall more rigorous than the astronomy that came before it, we should not
imagine him to have been a 21st century astronomer plucked from modernity and
transplanted into ancient Greece.  Like those that came before him he had
thoughts about the nature of the arche for example, he thought that it was fire
and air, but he at the same time was more interested in measuring periodicities
in the heavens and in observing what was going on in the heavens than his
predecessors generally were.  So he is very much a transitional figure in that
regard.

Well, at long last we have done it.  We have exhausted the pre-Socratics.  But
hopefully we are not exhausted as well.  Because now it's time to move beyond
to the Socratics.  But before we do, one thing I do want to make clear is that
the term pre-Socratic isn't exactly a chronological classification.  Of course
the vast majority of the pre-Socratics were active before the time of Socrates
which is why they get their name, but as a term it really also has much do with
the kind of philosophy that they were interested in rather than a strict
chronology.  So there are later pre-Socratics who were active after the time of
Socrates, some of whom we've already talked about, like Philolaus the
Pythagorean.  But a major feature of pre-Socratic philosophy is the subjects
we've been talking about up to now.  Their interest in natural philosophy,
cosmology, cosmogony and so on.  Of course this wasn't all they were interested
in, many of them had things to say about ethics and epistemology and how to
live the good life and we saw some of that in our exploration of them.

But, now that we have said as much as I want to say about the pre-Socratics
it's naturally time to move on to the broad grouping of the Socratic
philosophers.  And the first of these that we'll look at is none other than
Plato.

Now, it admittedly feels a little odd for me to make this leap from the
pre-Socratic into the Socratic philosophers and in so doing just casually hop
right over the man of the hour, the great Socrates himself.  But there are two
problems with Socrates from our perspective, if I can be so bold.  The first
is that we don't know of anything he said about astronomy, so his realm of
inquiry was somewhat tangential to ours.  And, as by now I'm sure you're aware,
I like to keep this podcast laser focused on the history of astronomy.  The
second problem is somewhat related to the first.  The reason we don't know of
anything that Socrates had to say about astronomy is that it's actually very
difficult to divine what he said about anything at all.  Socrates wrote nothing
down and his personality is only conveyed to us through the writings of
contemporaries, particularly Xenophon, Aristophanes, and, above all, Plato.
But Socrates was apparently such a signal figure that these authors mixed in
their own philosophy into the words they put in his mouth so separating out
what is Plato, what is Xenophon, and what is Socrates is very difficult.  Now
you may be objecting that plenty of the earlier philosophers I talked about
also wrote nothing down and yet that didn't stop me from squinting through
copies of quotations of bits and bobs that students of theirs had written down
centuries later in an effort to understand what, say, Thales thought about the
arche or whether or not he had really predicted that eclipse.  But those
earlier philosophers had much to say on the subject of astronomy so the juice
was worth the squeeze.  But while it's worth sussing out Socrates's thoughts
about ethics and virtue, nothing that we can say for sure about Socrates's
astronomy, or even whether he for sure had said anything on the topic has
survived.  So with apologies to the great philosopher, we will just have to
pass over him lightly.

But we cannot do the same for his greatest student, Plato.  Quite unlike his
teacher, Plato wrote extensively, some 35 dialogs and 13 letters.  And in a
first in our journey through Greek astronomy, these writings have in large part
survived.  In fact with Plato we have the opposite problem than we did before
--- there are *too* many works attributed to him and some of them were probably
written by other authors.  And to make matters even better for a podcast about
the history of astronomy, he had plenty to say on the subject of astronomy.

But before we really dig in, it would be no good unless I started with some of
Plato's biographical details.  Now, maybe a bit surprisingly for a figure of
such tremendous stature in the history of philosophy and from whom so many
works survive, we really don't know a lot about Plato's life, certainly not as
much as we would like.  And given how much he wrote I won't spend too much time
dwelling on his biography, but he was born in the mid to late 420s BC around
the beginning of the First Peloponnesian War and came of age as a young man
around the end of the Second Peloponnesian War.  The end of the Second
Peloponnesian War traditionally marks the end of the Golden Age of Athens after
Athens lost the war to Sparta and came under Spartan rule.  After Athens's
defeat, Sparta installed a government consisting of a pliant committee of
thirty individuals who became known as the Thirty Tyrants, and although they
were in power for less than a year, they led a purge which ended up killing
around 5% of the Athenian population and exiled many others.  So Plato entered
public life really right at the tail end of the good times in Athens.  The
leader of the Thirty Tyrants, Critias, was actually an Athenian himself, so he
was a kind of Quisling figure, a traitor of his own people.  And because
Critias was an acquaintance of Socrates and apparently several others of the
Thirty Tyrants were students of Socrates, Socrates did not exactly become a
popular figure in Athens after the Athenians rebelled against the rule of the
Thirty Tyrants.  So this was the political background that Plato came of age
in.

Now the name Plato was not actually his given name, but was a nickname which
literally translates to "broad." What exactly this refers to is not known for
sure.  According to the dodgy Diogenes Laërtius, Plato was apparently quite a
good wrestler and this nickname was given to him by his wrestling coach on
account of his broad shoulders.  But some have speculated that it could have
referred to his forehead being broad or maybe the broad scope of his learning.

Where exactly Plato was born is also something of a mystery.  It could have
been Athens or it could have been on the island of Aegina.  Regardless, his
family had ties to Athens, so at some point in his education he moved there.

Well, like every other philosopher of the day, Plato was aristocratic and had a
good education.  Of course, formal schools as we think of them did not exist in
his day, so he had a variety of tutors, eventually becoming a devotee of
Socrates.  Plato then would have been in his mid thirties or so during the
trial of Socrates, which affected him deeply.  In this trial, in 399 BC,
Socrates was accused and convicted on two charges: impiety and corruption of
the youth, with the punishment of execution by drinking hemlock.  From a modern
perspective, these charges may strike us as rather vague, maybe like a modern
charge of obstruction of justice, so just looking at the trial in isolation
it's a little hard to understand what problem the Athenians had with Socrates.
It's easy to spin this as a case of a freethinking teacher suffering the
backlash of a close-minded society, but the broader political context in which
the trial took place helps to provide a little more motivation as to the real
reasons for the trial.  This trial took place just seven years after the defeat
of the Athenians, and then the bloody rule of the Thirty Tyrants.  Athens was
still struggling to reassert its independence from Sparta and restore its
earlier democratic style of government.  In just a few years Athens would go so
far as to seek the support of Persia to rebel against Sparta in an effort to
regain full independence in the Corinthian War.  Socrates, however, was not
really in favor of any of this.  He wasn't really very keen on the idea of
democratic government at all.  Although we don't know exactly what his
political philosophy was because he never wrote his ideas down, it's clear that
his sympathies were more for an oligarchy or even better rule by technocrats.
He seemed to believe that Athens's enemy Sparta had a better system of
government than Athens did.  His students had been members of the Thirty
Tyrants.  And here he was openly singing the praises of Spartan rule to young
students and warning them of the dangers of democracy.  So in this context it's
perhaps no surprise even if maybe not justified that he was put on trial and
280 jurors found him guilty.  What is maybe more of a surprise is that 220 of
them voted that he was innocent.  Nevertheless, a simple majority was all that
was needed and, despite his students' offers to spirit him away to friendlier
jurisdictions, Socrates agreed to submit to the rule of his government and
drank the poisoned elixir.

Perhaps motivated by the execution of his teacher Socrates, sometime after this
Plato began traveling, probably around his late thirties.  He apparently
traveled to Italy and found himself disgusted by the hedonism of the natives
there.  But his travels in Italy had the benefit that they almost certainly
exposed him to Pythagoreanism, which had a major influence on his overall
philosophy and his astronomy specifically.  Ultimately he ended up back in
Athens, perhaps once the political turmoil had settled down a little bit and
there founded his philosophical school, one of the first formal, organized
schools in the West.  This school was located on some land just outside of
Athens called the Grove of Hekademos.  How it acquired this name is unclear and
sources vary.  Some say that it was named after the figure Hekademos who was a
hero in a Greek myth involving Theseus.  Or it may have just been named after a
previous owner of the land and maybe that person happened to be named
Hekademos.  At any rate, the fame of the location as center of learning and
debate led to it being memorialized down the ages.  The Romans later Latinized
the name Hekademos to Academus, and the term The Academy as a synonym for
institutional higher learning has been with us ever since.

Towards the end of his life Plato evidently achieved his lifelong dream of
entering political life and had the opportunity to try out some of his
political theories in the real world.  This was not in Athens, however, but in
the town of Syracuse in Sicily.  But this experiment did not go very well for
Plato, because the tyrant of Syracuse, Dionysius the Elder, did not take to
Plato’s suggestions and had the philosopher imprisoned.  The details are a
little sketchy, but at least according to the story as it comes to us through
Diogenes Laërtius, Plato was condemned to death, but the tyrant ultimately
relented and decided to sell the philosopher into slavery instead.  Fortunately
for Plato, a friend of his, the philosopher Anniceris purchased his freedom for
the low price of 20 minas.  You might recall from Episode 5 that a mina was an
intermediate unit of currency between the shekel and the talent.  The average
laborer could expect to earn a few minas in a year, so 20 minas was a
relatively large sum of money for most people, about a few years wages, maybe
roughly two or three hundred thousand dollars in today's money.  But for an
aristocratic philosopher this really was very reasonable.  Certainly nothing
compared to the fine of five talents that Anaxagoras was forced to pay!

Now, believe it or not, this was not Plato’s last interaction with the tyrants
of Syracuse.  Some time later Dionysius the Elder died and was succeeded by
none other than Dionysius the Younger.  Dionysius the Younger was evidently
something of a playboy and had had no real experience with public affairs until
he was thrust upon the throne.  But his uncle, a man by the name of Dion, had
been a fan of Plato all those years ago when Plato was on the island, at least
until he lost the favor of Dionysius the Elder.  So Dion had the idea of
bringing Plato back to the island to tutor Dionysius the Younger in the ways of
statecraft and guide him to become the ideal philosopher-king.  Well, evidently
Dionysius the Younger was actually quite taken by Plato’s ideas but seems to
have put a somewhat Machiavellian spin of his own on them, and ultimately came
to see his uncle as a dangerous rival to the throne, so he had his uncle
expelled from the island.  And then decided to prevent Plato from leaving the
island so that he could continue to learn from the great philosopher at his own
leisure.  Well, somehow Plato managed to escape, but nothing else of note
happened in his life after that and he died sometime in his eighties.

Well, as I mentioned a bit ago, Plato is quite different relative to the
earlier philosophers because he wrote extensively --- 35 dialogs and 13 letters
--- and as far as we know these works all survived, so we have a much more
direct and complete understanding of his thought relative to the philosophers
we've discussed thus far.  Now, none of these works are dated, so no order or
chronology is definitively known.  But traditionally, classicists have divided
his works into three periods, an early, middle, and late, based on an evolution
in style.  The dialogs are really where it's at when it comes to Plato's
philosophy, Plato's letters are more useful to glean biographical information
about his life, though his seventh letter is the notable exception.  But the
dialogs prominently feature Socrates as the main character and by and large
just present a conversation between Socrates and one or more individuals.  It's
generally believed that the dialogs of the early period hew closer to
Socrates's own thought.  Here Plato was attempting to act as a conduit to
simply record Socrates's philosophy.  But later on Plato's works start to
reflect his own personal philosophy although he continues with the device of
recording Socrates engaging in a conversation, though now he is stuffing his
own ideas in Socrates's mouth.

35 dialogs is quite a lot to parse and there are certainly a lot of beefy
philosophical ideas in there.  But for our purposes there are only five works
that touch on astronomy: Phaedrus, Phaedo, and the Republic, all from the
middle period, and then the Laws and the Timaeus which are from the late
period.

Now before going too deep into what exactly his astronomical ideas were, we
should first try to understand how Plato conceived of astronomy as a system of
thought.  What was its place among the different kinds of human knowledge?  His
thoughts on the subject were detailed in *The Republic*.  These days Plato's
Republic is his best known work, and it basically sets out Plato's conception
of the ideal state.  I won't go into the political philosophy he presents, but
core to his beliefs is the idea that the state ought to be governed by a
philosopher-king, a single man, who, through philosophical study, had attained
the wisdom necessary to govern justly.  This then raised the question --- how
do you create a philosopher-king?  It's certainly not the natural state of
affairs.  So in Book 7 Plato sets out about explaining what the proper course
of study is for an aspiring philosopher-king.  Central to this course of study
is the goal that the child's study should elevate the soul to ponder only the
highest of things.  Now, for the sake of time I'm going to gloss over some of
the central tenets of Plato's philosophy, because really it takes a whole
lecture series to do justice to Plato's philosophy, but Plato was very much of
the opinion that the real world was at a sort of lower plane of being than what
he called the eidos or ideas, what is usually translated as the Forms.  To
Plato, the truly real world was the world of Forms.  The Forms were ideal and
unchanging and what we think of as the real world around us is but a pale image
of the forms.  Geometry gives the best illustration of the idea.  To Plato,
there exists the Form of a square, which is, in a sense, the idea of a perfect
square.  All four sides are exactly the same length, the lines are infinitely
thin, the angles are all exactly 90 degrees, and naturally, this perfect square
never changes.  But we, in this world around us, never see the Form.  All we
can do is create poor approximations of the Form.  We can draw things that look
like squares, but the lines are never exactly the same length, the angles are
never exactly 90 degrees, if I draw a square in the sand on a beach, the ocean
can destroy it.  This is a natural enough idea when it comes to geometry, but
Plato believed that it extended to everything else as well.  There is a Form
corresponding to the chair that you sit in.  There is even a Form corresponding
to you and me.  The first step towards wisdom is recognizing that what we
perceive as the real world isn't the realest of worlds.  There exists a
hyperreal world, the world of Forms.  The philosopher-king therefore cannot be
distracted by the mess of the real world but, to attain clarity of thought,
must turn his attention exclusively to the world of forms.  Now, it's
impossible to do this perfectly, but the subjects of study should bring him as
close as possible to this ideal.

Consequently the subjects of his study should not touch upon things farthest
from the forms, objects of sensation and perishable goods.  Plato, speaking
through the character Socrates then considers various subjects to ask whether
or not they are suitable for the philosopher-king to study.  First he considers
gymnastics and music, but he immediately rejects both of these.  Gymnastics,
after all, deals with the body, which is inherently corruptible.  The word for
music in ancient Greek is actually somewhat broader than we use it today and it
also encompassed poetry and drama as well, since these were customarily set to
music.  But music is inherently transient and so is no good for the young
philosopher-king.  Naturally none of the useful arts like carpentry are
considered worthy of the philosopher king.

But then Plato comes to mathematics and here Plato starts to find this
interesting.  Now we're starting to deal with something in the world of the
Forms.  Now, when Plato uses the word mathematics, he is actually referring to
two distinct subjects: arithmetic, which to him is basically number theory; and
logic, which is confusingly, more like what we call arithmetic today, though of
course Plato discouraged the philosopher-king from performing any calculations
that might be of use for anything.  But geometry was not included under this
umbrella.  Plato considered geometry to be a separate subject from mathematics.
Nevertheless, Plato believed geometry, too, to be an excellent subject of study
for the philosopher-king, and then said that the next step would be the study
of solids of rotation and then solid geometry.  There's actually a bit of an
interesting digression in the Republic at this point where Plato then takes
some time lamenting the poor state of knowledge of solid geometry in his day
and calls on the state to provide more funding for the field so the knowledge
can be advanced.  It really sounds like an ancient Greek version of an NSF
grant proposal.

Well, there's an interesting progression here in these subjects where you can
kind of think of arithmetic and logic as being the mathematics of one
dimensional objects, geometry as being the mathematics of two dimensional
objects, and solid geometry being the mathematics of three dimensional objects,
with the geometry of solids of rotation being sort of in between.  So we see a
progression from one to three dimensions and the subjects become more noble and
bring the philosopher-king closer to the realm of the Forms.

Plato then goes one step further to say that next highest stage of study is
astronomy.  Because to him, astronomy is the study of solids in motion.  So we
have now gone beyond simple static three dimensional objects, but three
dimensional objects moving in *time*.  Now at this point Plato falls over
himself to be quite clear about what he considers to be good astronomy versus
bad astronomy.  You might think that astronomy is a valuable subject for the
philosopher-king to study because it naturally elevates the mind towards higher
things, namely the heavens.  What can be higher than the heavens, they're right
above us.  Plato says, sure you can think that, as long as you're an idiot.  To
him, the physical location of the heavens has nothing to do with it, because
that's just how things happen to be in the real world, and that does not
represent the world of Forms.  He gives a little thought experiment to try to
disprove this mistaken attitude.  Suppose that you lived in a room with a high
ceiling that was carved with intricate artwork.  Would staring at this ceiling
be the highest subject of study simply because it's above your head?  Certainly
not!  So similarly we shouldn't assume that astronomy is the highest subject of
study just because it is literally over our heads.  It takes pride of place
because it is the study of solids in motion, a sort of four-dimensional
geometry.

Now a consequence of this is that to Plato, the astronomy that the
philosopher-king should study must never be what we might call contingent
astronomy.  The philosopher-king should never be so vulgar as to bother himself
with doing something like predicting the motions of the planets on the sky.
How they appear on the sky tonight or tomorrow is just how they happen to be in
this world, not how they actually are in the world of Forms.  So instead the
focus of study should be on what he called "problems."  By this he seems to
have meant a sort of generalization of geometrical problems, how to bisect an
angle, for example, to astronomical problems.  But what exactly would
constitute an astronomical problem in Plato's meaning is a little unclear.  The
discovery of Neptune by Adams and Le Verrier through their mathematical
analysis of Uranus's orbit is probably a little too messy to count for Plato.
But Newton's discovery of his three laws of motion maybe gets a little closer
at the spirit of Plato's ideal astronomy.

Well, all this is to say that astronomy, at least the right kind of astronomy,
held an exalted place for Plato in his hierarchy of knowledge, but only a very
specific kind of astronomy.  We can very much see the contrast between the
character of Plato's astronomy and the astronomy of Oenopides that I was
telling you about earlier.  

Now, as always I don't want to get too carried away with this.  Plato seems to
have softened his stance later in life on the value of astronomy as it regards
the actual heavens above us.  We have testimony from the author Sosigenes that
according to Plato, the biggest open problem in astronomy of the day was
discovering the pattern of the motions of the planets and Plato challenged his
students to go out and find this pattern.

Well, okay, we've now gotten to know a little bit about Plato's attitude
towards astronomy, but what were his actual theories of astronomy?  Here,
Plato's astronomy was something of a synthesis.  He didn't propose any
revolutionary new ideas, but seemed to pick and choose from the available
theories of the day to compose something that made the most sense to him.  By
and large the overall cosmology is very similar to that of the early
Pythagoreans with a geocentric model and the planets moving in circles around
the Earth, but we'll do a whirlwind tour of the five dialogs in which Plato
talks about astronomy.

The first of these is Phaedrus.  Much of this dialog is a discussion about the
nature of the soul, and here Plato introduces his famous Chariot Allegory.  You
may have heard this idea before, the soul is like a charioteer driving a
chariot attached to two horses in the sky.  One horse as always trying to bring
the chariot higher, and the other horse is trying to bring the chariot lower.
Thus the soul needs to mediate between the nobler side of our nature and the
side that is driven towards base desires.  But the rest of the surrounding
context of the Chariot Allegory is usually lost and has something to do with
Plato's astronomy.  After all, the chariot allegory makes sense, but it is a
little bit odd that the chariot is flying through the sky.  In the surrounding
context of the Phaedrus, Plato describes a sky that is evidently filled with
flying chariots.  Some of these chariots are driven by the gods and their
motion is regular, and others are driven by human souls, and the motion of
these is irregular.  The chariots of the gods form an orderly procession,
flying higher and higher in the sky until they reach the summit of heaven,
where they can look and see what is beyond.  The goal of the human soul is to
follow this procession by driving one's chariot higher and higher.  But because
of the horse that tends downward, this motion is always somewhat erratic.
Nevertheless, capable individuals can sometimes control their chariot well
enough to reach the summit of heaven and see beyond into what is evidently the
realm of Forms.  Apparently though even if you get to this point, perceiving
what you are looking at is very difficult for a mortal.  Although the gods can
see the realm of the Forms in perfect clarity, a mortal, if they are lucky, may
only be able to perceive one or two things.  Then the procession continues
downward back to Earth.  Mortals who managed to see something in the realm of
Forms are given the privilege of getting another go on this cosmic Ferris
wheel, but otherwise are reincarnated, with their position in the subsequent
life being dictated by how high they managed to drive their chariots.
Naturally the highest position one can be reincarnated into is a philosopher.
But Plato is very clear that this does *not* include the sophists.  Those are
souls that in their cosmic journey flew even lower than manual laborers, but
at least higher than tyrants.

Well this doesn't sound super astronomical, but Plato goes into some detail
about the chariots of the gods.  The greatest of them all is Zeus as Zeus is
the captain of heaven.  But there are eleven divisions of gods under him,
making twelve divisions in all.  Zeus, of course, is at the highest level and
at the lowest is Hestia, who represents the fixed Earth.  Then in between there
are the five planets, along with the Sun and the Moon.  This all makes up 9 of
the chariots, so there are three that remain.  What these three are is more
speculative, but they may represent air, water, and aether in shells
surrounding the Earth.  So first is the air of the atmosphere, then there must
be a layer of water where the rain comes from, and beyond that is the aether
through which the planets in the superlunary realm move.

Well that's about all the astronomy there is in Phaedrus, but from the little
that is there we can at least intuit a sense of Plato's cosmology.  The next
dialog, Phaedo, is similar in that it's largely about the nature of the soul
and the afterlife.  The setting of the work is that it is a discussion with
Socrates on the day of his death.  But instead of mentioning his cosmology in
this work, Plato spends a bit of time discussing his ideas about the shape of
the Earth.  To Plato, the shape of the Earth is not a randomly chosen thing,
but has been shaped by Anaxagoras's Mind, the Nous.  Indeed all things in the
universe have deeper reasons for their current configuration.  Well the first
part of Plato's model of the Earth is quite sensible.  He states that the Earth
is spherical and sits at the center of the universe by symmetry.  In this way
he seems to have combined the best from Anaximander, who believed that the
Earth floated in the center of the universe by symmetry, with the Pythagorean
model of a spherical Earth.  So far everyone is probably nodding their heads in
agreement.  But then Plato goes a bit farther and says that, well, the Earth
isn't exactly spherical, it's actually dimpled, like a golf ball.  Everything
we know to be the Earth is actually just in one of these dimples.  This implies
that the Earth is much, much larger than we perceive it to be.  Aristotle
actually talks about this theory of Plato's and is skeptical of it and for more
than just his usual knee-jerk rejection of other people's ideas.  Aristotle
points out that the Earth cannot be all that large because there are stars in
the southern part of the sky that can be seen in Egypt that cannot be seen in
Greece, and similarly there are stars which in Greece are always above the
horizon and which in Egypt rise and set.  If Egypt and Greece were in the same
dimple of a vastly larger sphere the skies would look identical in those two
locations --- you'd have to move from one dimple to another to start to see
changes in the sky.

Well, there's one more line related to astronomy in Phaedo, and this is that
Plato notes in passing that some people have blinded themselves by looking at
the Sun during an eclipse and that if you want to do it safely you should look
at it reflected in water or something similar.  So when you hear astronomers
warn you not to look at the Sun during an eclipse, this is not a new thing,
astronomers have been warning you against doing anything of sort for at least
2500 years.

Okay, well the last of the works from Plato's middle period that are of
interest to us is the Republic.  I've already talked a fair amount about the
Republic with regard to Plato's thoughts on the status of astronomy as a field.
But he also presents his cosmology in a little more detail.  Now, as we saw
with Phaedrus, Plato's astronomical theories are wrapped up in philosophical
and mythological imagery, which can make it a little hard to understand what
exactly these ideas are or even that he's talking about astronomy at all if
you're reading the text on a superficial level.  This is also the case in the
Republic where his astronomy is wrapped up into the Myth of Er.  The Myth of Er
is a story about a man named Er who dies in battle.  Twelve days later his body
is about to be burned when he suddenly revives and gives an account of his
experience in the afterlife.

Er had found himself in a vast meadow.  There were two doors, one leading up to
the sky, and one leading into the ground.  People would come before a set of
judges who would direct them either to one of the doors leading up into the sky
or into the one leading into the ground.  There was another pair of doors, one
in the sky and one in the ground, out of which people would return from their
journey in the afterlife.  The returning souls were permitted to mingle in the
meadow for seven days before traveling onward another four days and then
selecting their station in the next life.  Then they would drink from the River
Lethe which would cause them to forget their experience in the afterlife and
their souls would be transported down to Earth to begin their new life.

On this fourth day after journeying from the meadow, the souls had come to a
location in which they appear to see the structure of the universe.  Plato says
that they see what he calls the "Spindle of Necessity".  His description of it
is that it is:

> A straight light extending from above through the whole heaven and earth,
> like a pillar, most like to the rainbow, but brighter and purer.  There at
> the middle of the light they saw, extended from heaven, the extremities of
> the chains thereof, for this light it is which binds the heaven together,
> holding together the whole revolving firmament as the undergirths hold
> together triremes; and from the extremities they saw extended the Spindle of
> Necessity by which all the revolutions are kept up.

Now, thanks to this poetic description, what exactly the Spindle of Necessity
is is a bit of a mystery.  One interpretation is that it refers to the Milky
Way.  Of course, from here on Earth the Milky Way appears curved above us on
the sky, but the thought is that the souls are seeing the heavens from beyond
the sphere of the fixed stars, so they may be looking at the Milky Way from
outside at an angle where it appears to be a straight pillar.  The other
thought is that this pillar represents the axis of rotation of the universe,
but that this light is only visible in the afterworld since we clearly don't
see any pillar of light shooting up to the north star in this life.

Well, regardless, Plato then goes on to describe how around the Spindle of
Necessity there are rotations of eight whorls, and describes the size and color
of each of these whorls.  The largest of these whorls is multi-colored and
represents the fixed stars, then, getting closer to Earth we have Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, the Sun, and finally the Moon, although he
doesn't actually specify their names.  But naturally for example the whorl
which is described as pale red is also the fourth to most outermost whorl just
where you would expect Mars to be.  The whorl second closest to us is the
brightest and corresponds to the Sun.  The whorl closest to us borrows its
light from the second and so is the Moon, which reflects the light from the
Sun.

The whorls themselves are described to have rims around the edges.  Now this
seems to imply that the whorls cannot be spheres.  The planets are then carried
around on the rim of each of their respective whorls, though of course this
doesn't seem to make too much sense for the fixed stars since they clearly form
a sphere.  One way around this is to imagine the whorls to be hemispheres that
sit one inside the other.  The outermost hemisphere is speckled with stars and
then the other seven carry their respective planets at their edge.  But it may
not be possible to get a very literal understanding of the structure here.
After all, it's not even clear whether or not the souls described in the Myth
of Er are actually looking at the whorls of the actual universe, or are simply
looking at a *model* of the universe, in which case the shapes of the whorls in
the model may have been opened up so to speak so that you could look inside and
see what was going on, see the internal workings of the universe.

Well, in addition to this, Plato also describes the dynamics of these whorls.
The whorls have a collective motion which is their 24 hour rotation, but then
they also have their own slower individual motions as well.  The Moon's
individual motion is the most rapid, the Sun, Mercury and Venus all have
similar motions, then Mars and Jupiter with Saturn slowest of all.  Now, this
is actually quite an insightful observation to make.  Because in absolute
terms, Saturn appears to move the fastest and the Moon appears to move the
slowest.  But this is simply an illusion because most of that motion is the
east to west daily rotation of the sky.  If we subtract that motion off, then
the planets have a slow drift from west to east with Saturn drifting most
slowly and the Moon drifting the fastest.

Finally, Plato also says that sirens sit atop the rims of each of the eight
whorls and sing as they spin around, producing a harmony of the spheres, a
concept he almost surely borrowed from the Pythagoreans when he visited them in
Italy.

Okay, so that's the astronomy of Plato's Republic.  But in the grand scheme of
history, Plato's Republic is really quite a piddling work, hardly worth
discussing.  Now we turn to Plato's most influential work: the Timaeus.  And I
am not being facetious here.  Of course everyone today has heard of Plato's
Republic and I would venture a guess that unless you studied classics or
ancient Greek philosophy, you probably would not have heard of the Timaeus.
But historically the Timaeus is by far Plato's most significant work.  By a
fluke of history, a Roman author by the name of Cicero, who also was known for
his political activities, happened to translate the Timaeus into Latin.
Cicero's translation was not complete, but it was enough to maintain interest
in the work in the later Roman Empire, and spurred a later author, Calcidius,
to do a more complete translation.  Consequently, in the Middle Ages the
Timaeus remained largely available throughout the western world, whereas
virtually all of Plato's other works were not.  In fact, up until the 1300s or
so, when the rest of Plato's work starts to get introduced into Europe, to say
that you were reading Plato was to say that you were reading the Timaeus.
There was nothing else of Plato's to read at the time.  This started to change
in the 1100s as a consequence of the Crusades in the East, which brought
Byzantine scholars into closer contact with the Latins, and also, importantly,
the Reconquista in Spain, as various Spanish kings attempted with varying
degrees of success to push the Muslims out of the Iberian peninsula.  This also
brought Latin scholars into contact with the intellectual culture of Islam, and
Muslim scholars had long ago translated many Greek texts into Arabic and added
their own commentaries on them with Plato included.  We will go into much more
depth in a later episode about this cultural exchange because it was critical
for the development of medieval science in Europe.  But all this is to say that
for Plato at least, until about the 1300s there wasn't anything but the Timaeus
in Europe.  Even after other texts came to be available, the Timaeus retained
its immense stature in Plato's oeuvre by sheer inertia.  It wasn't really until
the 19th century that the Republic came to be regarded as one of Plato's more
important works and came to displace the Timaeus.  By the 20th century,
however, the Timaeus had become almost totally eclipsed by Plato's other works
because it is, well, rather strange to moderners.  Whereas many of Plato's
other works deal with Plato's political philosophy or ethical philosophy or
epistemology, all subjects excellent for philosophical discussions, and maybe
tangentially incorporate his ideas about astronomy here and there, the Timaeus
really does feature Plato's cosmology front and center as the central topic of
discussion.  So a 20th century philosophy class can get a lot from reading the
Republic and having those eternal debates about what constitutes an ideal
state, and just sort of skim over all the strange tales of 8 whorls spinning
around a Spindle of Necessity.  But it's not so easy to do that with the
Timaeus because the cosmology really is what it's all about.  So the Timaeus
has now rather fallen from its pride of place in Plato's oeuvre.  The
classicist Benjamin Jowett wrote that "Of all the writings of Plato, the
Timaeus is the most obscure and repulsive to the modern reader." So let's dive
right in.

The first thing I'll say about the content of the Timaeus is that you have
actually heard of one piece of it.  The myth of Atlantis actually originates in
the Timaeus.  The story is actually only told in passing, which I think makes
it all the more surprising that it has ended up having the cultural impact that
it has.  It perhaps speaks to the dearth of information from the ancient world
that even minor details in surviving works were poured over by centuries of
scholars in the middle ages and became indelibly ingrained in the larger
culture.  In Plato's telling, there had at one time been a great nation called
Atlantis which existed on an island somewhere out in the Atlantic Ocean.
Atlantis had attacked Athens a long time in the past.  However, the government
of Athens in those days was organized according to Plato's conception of the
ideal state and so was able to fend off this great power --- indeed, it was
apparently the only state capable of beating back Atlantis.  Atlantis's attack
against this ancient Athens then displeased the gods who caused great
earthquakes and floods so that the entire island sank into the ocean.  The
whole description is only a paragraph, but it has had an outsized impact since
generations of scholars and explorers have wondered if Plato knew something
they didn't and perhaps there really was such an island that sank into the sea.
But as far as we can tell, this story is entirely a product of Plato's
prodigious imagination.

Well, most of the Timaeus is dedicated to Plato's cosmogony.  As the
description of the universe gets going, we learn that the universe takes the
form of a perfect sphere, as the sphere is the most perfect of all the shapes.
Moreover, there are no other universes and the universe is eternal and alive,
imbued with a soul similar to the Nous, or mind, of Anaxagoras.  The Creator of
the universe set the universe about in rotation, this being the 24 hour
rotation of the stars above us.  Now, this soul of the universe consists of
three parts.  The first here is Unity.  The Creator then separated out a second
component which was Difference.  Then the Creator combined these two components
to create a third, called Essence.  This division of the essential nature of
being into three parts from one might sound familiar from our episode on the
Pythagoreans.  After setting the universe rotating, the Creator then imbued the
universe with this mixture of unity, difference, and essence, different parts
of the universe receiving different proportions of this mixture.

Now the way that this was done was that the Creator made a strip and imbued
this strip with the soul, but with different parts of the strip having
different proportions of the three components of unity, difference, and
essence.  The different parts of the strip had proportions in order to produce
a musical scale and infuse it with harmony.  Then the Creator split the strip
in two and formed an X with the now two strips.  He then bent the strips around
two form two circles at an angle to each other.  The way that the strip was
originally split in two, the outer circle ended up being composed of Unity, and
the inner circle composed of Difference.  The Creator then split the inner
circle into seven individual circles, and now we see where things are going.
The outer circle represents the fixed stars, and because their shapes are
unchanging, they are composed of Unity.  The seven circles from the other strip
form the five planets along with the Sun and Moon.  Since their positions
change over time, they must contain some of the element of Difference, but in
different proportions since they move at different speeds.  These seven circles
then get their own unique rotations in an opposite direction on top of the
overall 24 hour rotation that the Creator instigated at the beginning of the
universe.

Now one detail in all this that is a little bit unclear is that when Plato
describes the 24 hour rotation of the stars, he describes it as being "to the
right."  But in ancient Greek culture, this would have referred to motion to
the east.  Diviners would predict the future by looking toward the north and
studying the paths of birds on the skies, so motion to the east would be
described as motion to the right, and in another text, the Laws, Plato also
uses the phrase "to the right" and is clearly referring to motion from the west
to the east.  But of course the stars rotate from the east to the west.  So
what is going on here?  Did Plato just mix up his left and right?  One theory
is that in this text Plato is describing the universe from the outside looking
in, in which case the left and right could be reversed.  But it's a little hard
to say what's going on here for sure. 

Well, Plato also tells us the dimensions of these seven circles, and these are
1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, and 27.  Now, once again, it's somewhat unclear what exactly
these dimensions refer to.  Is it the diameter of the circles?  Or is it the
distance of one circle to the next.  But it is clear from this sequence that
these are not physical measurements, but have been arrived at through
Pythagorean numerology.  These are numbers associated with the Pythagorean
Tetraktys, the sacred symbol of ten points arranged in a triangle.  You'll
recall from the episode on the Pythagoreans that the Pythagoreans considered 10
to be the most perfect of numbers because it was the combination of the first
four numbers and so contained all things.  The physical representation of the
number 10 was this Tetraktys a triangular arrangement with four dots at the
base, three above it, then two, and then one at the top.  Then down the left
leg of this triangle they put the sequence of squares, 1, 2, 4, 8, and so on
and on the right hand side the sequence of cubes, 1, 3, 9, 27.  Plato then
associated these sequences with the relative sizes of the planetary circles.
So, this is all in keeping with Plato's belief that astronomy was best done
without reference to observations, but as a pure product of philosophy.

Plato then relates the motions of the planets to the metaphysics of time.  In
Plato's philosophy the forms are eternal, but the created world is not.  The
created world is instead an image of the forms.  But the heavens come closest
to a true image of the forms, after all they are geometry in motion.  So they
move in a periodic pattern, which comes as close to the eternity of the forms
as we can see in this world.  In a sense, to Plato the motions of the planets
actually *create* time.  The periodic motion of the stars produces the day, the
periodic motion of the Moon produces the month, and the periodic motion of the
Sun creates the year.  Plato then asserts that the periodic motions of the
other planets produce more subtle units of time, which are only known to a wise
few.  Then there is a perfect unit of time, which is when all eight
revolutions, from the fixed stars up through Saturn are commensurate and end up
in the same place that they started.  This period is known as Plato's Great
Year and although Plato never explicitly gave its length, later authors
estimated it to be about 36,000 years.

Plato then describes how the planets closer to the Earth move more quickly than
the ones farther away.  But when he gets to the motions of Mercury and Venus he
gives a rather vague and confusing statement that seems to relate to their
retrograde motion, the fact that sometimes these planets, along with all the
rest, to be clear, halt in their usual west-to-east progression relative to the
background stars, and then turn around and go the other way for a while.  Plato
says:

> The Morning Star, and that which is held sacred to Hermes he placed in those
> orbits which move in a circle having equal speed with the Sun, but a contrary
> tendency to it; hence it is that the Sun and the star of Hermes, and the
> Morning Star overtake, and are in like manner overtaken by, one another.

Now, scholars have spilled vast oceans of ink trying to decipher exactly what
Plato meant by "contrary tendency".  The most natural interpretation of this is
that Plato is saying that Mercury and Venus both move in the opposite direction
from the Sun.  But this is very plainly not supported by the actual motions of
Venus and Mercury since neither of them get very far from the Sun.  Some
ancient authors suggested that Plato may have been referring to epicycles here
and that the motion of these planets on their epicycles was in the opposite
direction of the motion of the Sun.  But the problem here is that this seems to
be somewhat anachronistic.  There are no mentions of epicycles anywhere in
Plato's works.  We could also imagine a model in which Mercury and Venus have
variable motion along their orbits and are attached by a sort of spring to the
Sun.  So as one gets too far away from the Sun, the spring brings the planet
back towards the Sun and overshoots in the other direction.  This is closer to
what we see observationally, but there is no indication in Plato's writings
that the planets move in anything but a constant speed along their circles.
Indeed just one sentence before, Plato says that "they move in a circle having
the same speed as the Sun."  No one has really provided a satisfactory
explanation of what Plato meant by this.  Sir Thomas Heath writes, "it is not
surprising that commentators have exhausted their ingenuity to find an
interpretation less compromising to Plato's reputation as an astronomer."

Well, the last thing I'll say about the Timaeus is that a little later in the
text Plato also says a little bit about the stars, namely that they are made of
fire and that the Creator distributed souls to the various stars and set about
their rotation.  Given that the Timaeus has had such a huge influence on
scientific thought in the West, every word has been poured over by centuries of
scholars and there have been long debates about what exactly Plato meant here
and there.  Some scholars have argued that one part of the Timaeus seems to
indicate that Plato believed that the Earth rotated, although the evidence for
this claim is pretty thin and this is not a consensus view.  But in the
interests of time, we'll have to move on to the last work of Plato's that
touches upon astronomy, the Laws.

This work was one of Plato's last and was actually left unfinished by him.  His
student Philippus completed it, so some of the ideas may have been Philippus's.
The work is also a little unusual for Plato in that it's one of very few which
do not feature Socrates, at least explicitly.  Instead there are two older men,
Megillos and Cleinias going on a religious pilgrimage joined by a third,
unnamed individual who is simply called a stranger from Athens.  Nevertheless,
the speech of this stranger from Athens is rather Socratic so even if Plato has
not told us who this fellow is, we can all maybe guess who he had in mind.

As the title suggests, most of the work is about the nature of laws.  But Plato
touches on a variety of other subjects and in Book 7 has mind to expound on the
kind of education that is appropriate to children.  Plato, speaking through the
Athenian stranger, is naturally in favor of arithmetic and geometry as subjects
of study and then goes on to say that astronomy is quite appropriate as well.
Here he makes an interesting point about how the study of astronomy can bring
the student closer to the gods.  He says that the word "planet" is blasphemous.
The Athenian stranger explains that, well, the word "planet" literally means
wanderer.  But this seems to say that the gods wander about to and fro in the
sky with no aim or purpose and this is a blasphemous assertion.  A child must
study astronomy to understand that the movements of the planets are not aimless
wanderings, but follow a regular path --- this is one way to become closer to
the gods.  Furthermore, the study of astronomy is salutary to the student
because it teaches that things are not always what they appear to be.  In the
case of the motions of planets, the planet that appears to move fastest,
Saturn, is in fact the slowest, and the Moon, which appears to move the
slowest, actually moves the fastest.  Because in Plato's system, all planets
have the diurnal east to west motion of the stars, and then on top of that have
their own unique motions west to east.  So if we just look at the overall
motions, Saturn appears to move the fastest, but if we subtract off its daily
rotation, it now moves the slowest.

The Athenian stranger makes the point that if we were watching runners or
horses on a racetrack, we would want to know which one is the fastest and which
one is the slowest.  If we had gotten it backwards, we would be completely
embarrassed.  But if that's true for athletes, how much more true it is of the
gods in the heavens.  So Plato, speaking through the Athenian stranger, is very
much in favor of astronomy in a child's course of study.

Well, with that we more or less wrap up the astronomy that is mentioned in
these five works of Plato.  Plato's astronomy was not influential because he
made a radical departure from the astronomy of earlier philosophers, but
because he collected their best ideas and synthesized them into a simple,
fairly robust model.  In fact, some of you may be thinking at this point, what
astronomy of Plato?  All he did was say that the planets go around the Earth
and sprinkled on top a little mystic mumbo-jumbo about Unity and Difference and
Essence.  But there had been debate about things like the shape of the Earth
and the order of the planets and Plato's model became the standard model of the
age, except for his ginormous Earth.  He also included Oenopides's observation
of the obliquity of the ecliptic when the Creator took the two strips of souls
and formed an X in the Timaeus.  And really crucial to later models of the
Solar System was recognizing that all the planets had a daily east to west
motion and that the really interesting motion was what happened when you
subtracted this daily rotation off.

Now his attitude that observation wasn't worth bothering with was certainly not
a productive direction for the astronomy of his day.  But he did spur the field
forward by identifying what he thought was the most important astronomical
question of the time: the motions of the planets.  After all, in Plato's
philosophy the heavens were the most perfect icons of the forms.  They were
images of time itself.  They represented the deliberate movement of the gods.
Although they appeared to wander, Plato's philosophical and religious
intuitions told him that they could not wander randomly.

But Plato was not able to achieve this vision of deciphering the planetary
movements himself.  So he posed this problem to his students as a challenge.
And, one of his most brilliant students took him up on it.  I am talking, of
course, about Eudoxus.  Next month we'll learn about the first serious attempt
by a Greek astronomer to describe the motions of the planets.  I hope you'll
join me then.  Until the next full moon, good night, and clear skies.
