---
categories: episode
date: '2022-11-10'
description: During the half millennium of the Roman Era in Ancient Greece, only two
  astronomers made any major advances. At the beginning of the Roman Era, Posidonius
  measured the size of the Earth and discovered the relationship between the Moon
  and the tides. But the triumph of Greek astronomy came 300 years later with the
  intricate planetary model of Ptolemy, which stood unchallenged for some 1400 years.
keywords:
- astronomy
- history
- greece
layout: episode
number: 23
title: The Culmination of Ancient Greek Astronomy
---

## Transcript

Good evening and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon, or
thereabouts.  My name is Joe Antognini.

Last month we took a little detour from the overall narrative of ancient Greek
astronomy and looked at one of the most remarkable artifacts from antiquity,
the Antikythera Mechanism.  But prior to that digression, we had left off
talking about Hipparchus and all the wonderful discoveries he made in the 2nd
century BC.  So I will pick things up from right where we left them.  But
believe it or not, after Hipparchus's work in the 2nd century BC, we can more
or less skip over the next 300 years.  In all that time, there were essentially
no new developments in astronomy.  Not so long ago, back in the Classical Era,
it seemed that there was someone of note to talk about every decade or two, but
now Greek civilization has been brought to such a low point that three
centuries can pass without really making a mark on the oldest science.  If this
were a shorter series on the history of astronomy, I would be justified in
skipping straight ahead from Hipparchus to Ptolemy.

But devoted listeners to this podcast should know by now that it is not in the
character of this podcast to skip over 300 years without saying at least
a little about what happened in between and why there is so little to talk
about from this period.

But before we really get into that particular puzzle there are a couple of
loose ends I want to tie up in Hellenistic Era astronomy.  In particular I
wanted to mention Conon of Samos and Aglaonice.  I should have mentioned Conon
of Samos a few episodes back because he lived right through the middle of the
3rd century BC, so he predated Apollonius of Perga by about 50 years and was
probably a little younger than Aristarchus.  His serious astronomical work was
in a series of seven books called De Astrologica, but, in a tale you are by now
well familiar with, it does not survive.  All we know is that he wrote about
solar eclipses, possibly by collecting Egyptian records and possibly observing
some himself.  But the reason I bring up Conon of Samos is that he is also the
subject of a rather charming story about the constellation Coma Berenices, and
how it got its name, and I just couldn't pass it up.  As his name implies Conon
of Samos was born in Samos, but just like a great number of his countrymen like
Pythagoras and Aristarchus, he ultimately moved away and set up shop in a more
vibrant intellectual climate, in his case, Alexandria.  Conon must have had
quite a strong reputation as an astronomer because he was appointed to the
position of court astronomer in Ptolemy III's court.

Now I talked a little bit about the great power politics in the region two
episodes ago when I was talking about the geopolitical situation of the city of
Rhodes.  You may recall that after Alexander the Great had died, his empire
fractured and his generals seized whatever regions they could and set up their
own splinter states of larger or smaller sizes.  Around the eastern
Mediterranean there were three main players: the Ptolemaic dynasty in Egypt,
the Seleucid Empire in the east, and the Antigonid dynasty in Macedonia.  In
the centuries after Alexander's death, these empires were at each other's
throats and went to war on a regular basis.  During the time that Conon of
Samos was the court astronomer to Ptolemy III, the Ptolemaic Kingdom once again
went to war with the Seleucid Empire in what is called the Third Syrian War,
and, though they didn't know it at the time, at this point they were only
halfway through the total of six Syrian Wars that these two empires fought.

Ptolemy III was married to a woman named Berenice II, which gets anglicized to
Berenice.  They were technically related, her grandmother married Ptolemy III's
grandfather, which would make them second cousins, but only by marriage, not by
blood.  Later, more salacious stories had it that they were brother and sister,
though either way, Egyptian high society was fairly sanguine about
consanguinity.  At any rate, the marriage of Berenice II to Ptolemy III was
evidently a happy one, which was a historical rarity among the powerful.
When Ptolemy III had to ship off to war in Syria, Berenice II was so distraught
at the prospect of her husband being in harm's way that she made a sacrifice to
the gods.  But rather than making the usual sacrifice of bulls she decided to
make a more radical offering.  She cut off her hair, apparently shaving herself
bald, and placed her hair in the temple to Arsinoe Aphrodite to beseech the
gods for her husband's safe return.

Now the stories of what happened next differ in their timing, some say it was
the next day, others say it was a good while later, but at some point, the
queen's hair disappeared from the temple.  Furious not only that it was
embarrassing that someone had apparently stolen the queen's hair, but also that
this might ruin the offering she had made and put her husband in peril, the
queen brought together all the court officials and demanded answers for what
had happened.  Among them was the court astronomer Conon of Samos.  Probably to
the great relief of everyone else in the room, Conon was quick on his feet and
immediately explained that Aphrodite had been so pleased with the queen's
offering that she had taken it and placed it in the sky to be honored through
the ages.  Henceforth, a patch of stars between Boötes and Leo has been known
as Coma Berenices, or Berenice's hair.

This story was quite popular in the ancient world, and it was almost certainly
encouraged by the Egyptian state as a kind of propaganda as it made Berenices
II look quite good.  It emphasized the devotion of the queen to her husband,
her piety, and, above all, her favor with the gods.  Official depictions of
Berenices II often represented her with a shaved head to allude to this story,
and later Roman poets set the story in verse which is how it has survived to us
today.

A moral we might take from the story today is that sometimes it is not
sufficient for an astronomer to know astronomy.  Sometimes an astronomer must
have a certain, shall we say, creativity as well.

So that is Conon of Samos.  The last astronomer of the Hellenistic Era I wanted
to briefly mention, and then I promise we will move on to the Roman Era for
real, is Aglaonice, who was active in the late 2nd century or early 1st century
BC.  She is remarkable for being one of the very few astronomers of the ancient
world who was a she.  Over the course of our tour of Greek astronomy, we've
come across a couple of philosophers who thought it worthwhile to teach
philosophy to women, Pythagoras and Epicurus being some of the more prominent,
but even then their female students by and large went unnamed, or at least the
few that are named have nowhere near the prominence as some of their male
students do.  Now it seems that historical records of Aglaonice's work have
been rather colored by the fact that she was a woman, which makes it
unfortunately hard to get at what it was exactly that she did.  Many of the
representations make her out to be a kind of witch and she was in particular
known for her ability to make the moon disappear from the sky.  But a more
realistic interpretation of this is that she may have been able to predict the
occurrence of lunar eclipses, which was certainly possible to do given the state
of Greek astronomy at that point.  But it's not known to what extent the more
magical elements of her work were embraced by her or imposed on her by authors
writing about her.  As I'll talk about later in this episode when I get to
Ptolemy, the modern rigorous separation between the sciences like astronomy,
physics, and chemistry, and sorcery, divination and magic, did not exist in the
ancient world.  So while we would think it strange that someone would go about
hard-headed astronomical predictions of lunar eclipses on the one hand and then
try their hand at sorcery on the other, the ancients had no such hang-ups.

Well with that I promise you that we are officially finished with the astronomy
of the Hellenistic Era of Ancient Greece.  Way back when we started our journey
through Greek astronomy I said that historians generally divide the history of
ancient Greece into five periods: The Greek Dark Ages, the Archaic period, the
Classical period, the Hellenistic period, and last of all the Roman period.
Now this growing civilization of Rome has been making a few appearances in the
last couple of episodes.  They had been one out of a number of civilizations
over in Italy for many centuries, but around the second century BC, their
dominion really started to take off after their defeat of the Carthaginians in
the Punic Wars and they subsequently began encroaching on the kingdoms that had
been spun out of Alexander the Great's empire, most notably the Macedonian
Kingdom.  The canonical end to the Hellenistic Age and the start of the Roman
Age is 146 BC, when Rome sacked Corinth and took control of the Greek mainland,
but as always, the edges between the eras are a little fuzzy and it would take
more than a century before Rome brought Ptolemaic Egypt under its heel.

The main feature of Greek astronomy during the Roman Era is really just the
lack of it.  There are really only two figures of note in the whole half
millennium of the Roman Era, Posidonius, and, of course, Ptolemy.  Posidonius
was born at the beginning of the Roman Era, about a decade after the sack of
Corinth.  Posidonius was born in the city of Apamea in Syria.  Apamea was a bit
of an odd town, it had been founded by one of Alexander the Great's generals,
Seleucus, the originator of the Seleucid Empire.  Seleucus's purpose in
founding the city was as a way to give land to his veterans.  In the ancient
world, to secure the loyalty of their troops, generals would often promise
their soldiers a plot of land that they could call their own if they served in
the army for the requisite number of years.  If you were born into a poor,
landless family in the ancient world, joining up was really your only realistic
route to property ownership.  This strategy later ended up proving to be a
major systematic problem for Rome because it needed to acquire vast amounts of
land to provide to its vast armies.  This required it to conquer vast
territories, which meant that it needed to raise ever larger armies whose
troops would, in turn, require even more land.  Well that was centuries to come
and at the moment Seleucus did not have quite as serious a problem as Rome did,
but to give his soldiers land he had to found a number of cities and Apamea was
one.  But because he was plopping down a bunch of Greek soldiers in some
conquered territory, the surrounding culture was not really Greek.  This was
not unusual, of course, the Greeks had colonies all throughout the
Mediterranean.  Alexandria, the main center of Greek intellectual life during
the late Hellenistic Era, was really just a small Greek dot in the otherwise
culturally foreign country of Egypt.

It seems that from his upbringing in a Greek town surrounded by barbarians,
Posidonius became interested in the cultural practices of foreign peoples.
Now, the standards of cultural anthropology in his day were not quite what they
are today so he was unabashedly ethnocentric.  He thought, for example, that
the way that the peoples of the Levant went to battle was just ridiculous.  He
wrote that they go "clutching knives on their belts and filthy, rusting spears.
They drag behind them donkeys piled high with all manner of wine, food, flutes,
and musical instruments --- prepared for a party rather than a battle."

Well Posidonius was very smart and in his youth moved to Athens to learn at the
philosophical schools there, and found that the Stoic school was most to his
liking.  But sometime when he was in his 30s he began to travel extensively
through the Mediterranean and documented the customs of the peoples he
encountered.  His writings have become one of the most important sources we
have on the society of the Celts since they were an illiterate people and
didn't write anything down about themselves.  And, of course, if you can't
write anything down about yourself and have to rely on foreigners to describe
your society, the descriptions that get handed down through history can end up
full of exaggerations.  Posidonius, for example, thought that Gaulish women
were very beautiful, and remarked on their height --- the average Gaulish woman
was as tall as the average Greek man, but he felt that the beauty of the
Gaulish women was wasted on the Gaulish men since he wrote "the Gaulish men
prefer to have sex with each other. They often sleep on top of animal skins
surrounded by other males and roll around together on the ground. The young men
are unconcerned about proper behavior and will offer their bodies to anyone—and
they are highly offended when anyone turns them down."  There is perhaps a
story there that Posidonius isn't telling us.

Well, Posidonius also remarked on the Celtic practice of head hunting and how
everywhere you looked in a Celtic settlement there seemed to be the severed
heads of their enemies on display.  He writes "The Gauls cut off the heads of
the enemies they kill in battle and hang them around their horses’ necks. Then,
singing a song of victory, they take the bloody weapons from their fallen foes
and give them to their servants to carry home. The weapons they hang on their
walls like hunting trophies, but the heads they preserve in cedar oil, storing
them away carefully in chests."  Now it's easy to read this has being your
typical Greek exaggeration about the barbarities of the barbarians, but modern
archaeology seems to suggest that Posidonius may have downplayed the extent of
it if anything.  We now know from excavations that Celtic temples have the
skeletal remains of severed heads and put the heads on display in prominent
places.  Some have altars made of the bones of thousands of enemy warriors.
One of these temples had a structure that supported upright the decapitated
bodies of 80 slain warriors, all positioned holding their shields and swords as
if ready for battle.  The missing heads were undoubtedly displayed somewhere
else.

The historian Philip Freeman points out the contrasting attitudes of the Greeks
and the Celts in their treatment of the dead.  To the Greeks burial of the dead
was an absolute necessity.  Only a barbarian, literally or figuratively, would
let a dead body remain unburied.  You may recall back in Episode 16 when I was
talking about Archytas that there was a poem that describes a sailor coming
upon the dead body of the philosopher after a shipwreck and pouring some sand
on him so that his soul would not be condemned to wander the Earth for a
hundred years.  In Sophocles's play Antigone, the entire plot revolves around
the king of Thebes, Creon, refusing to permit the burial of his enemy
Polyneices, and how this brings about a conflict between Antigone's duty to the
gods and her duty to the state.  But the Celts had a different attitude toward
the dead.  Gruesome though it would have seemed to the Greeks, to display a
slain warrior's head in a prominent location was the highest honor you could
give to him.  Cowards were left to rot in the battlefield.  But the heads of
the bravest warriors were kept close in the hopes that he who possessed it
could be imbued with some of the spirit of a great warrior.

Well, living among the head hunting and warlike Celts was clearly not
Posidonius's favorite part of his grand tour of Europe.  Perhaps the thing he
was most excited to see was the Atlantic Ocean.  He had heard rumors about this
strange body of water and wanted to investigate its properties for himself.  In
particular he wanted to see if it was true what was said about how it exhibited
tides.  Tides are present in the Mediterranean Sea, but really only barely.
The difference between high tide and low tide in the eastern Mediterranean is
only around an inch or so.  But on the shore of a real ocean, the difference
between high tide and low tide is several feet.  So, for a full month,
Posidonius stayed in a house near the ocean in the town of Cádiz, on the
southern coast of Spain, west of the strait of Gibralter.  And for that month
he basically did nothing but watch the ocean.  He took hourly measurements of
the height of the ocean, along with measurements of the position and phase of
the Moon and found that the two were related.  Honestly it must have been the
most relaxing scientific investigation in history.  From his observations
Posidonius concluded that there was an intimate connection between the moon and
the tides.  Now he was not the first to suggest such a connection, but he was
the first who had the data to back it up.

Well, Posidonius's travels eventually came to an end and he ended up settling
in Rhodes and became the head of the Stoic school there, ultimately earning for
himself the reputation of being the most learned man of his day, and students
traveled far and wide to learn at his school.  Among his students were none
other than Pompey and Cicero.

Well in addition to his study of the tides, Posidonius also measured the size
of the Earth and the size of the Sun.  His measurement of the size of the Earth
was similar to the ideas we have heard before.  He noted that at Rhodes the
star Canopus would only ever peak above the horizon.  But in Alexandria it
would get up to 7 and a half degrees above the horizon.  Alexandria was more or
less due south from Rhodes and he estimated that they were about 5000 stades
apart.  From this, he was able to calculate the circumference of the Earth to
be 240,000 stades, only about 6% too small from its true value.  Unfortunately
for Posidonius, his measurement wasn't quite as accurate as Eratosthenes's was,
Erathosthenes you might recall, got within 1% of the true value.  But
Eratosthenes also seems to have gotten lucky and made a couple of mistakes that
happened to almost exactly cancel each other out.  Well, Posidonius also got
fairly lucky because he, too, made two errors, Canopus isn't exactly on the
horizon in Rhodes, it's more like a degree above it, and the distance is also
shorter than he assumed, but these two mistakes ended up partially cancelling
out, just not quite as perfectly as they had done for Eratosthenes.
Nevertheless, Posidonius's measurement was a good indication of the
state of Greek science of the day and how not only was the spherical
shape of the Earth by this point a settled question, but the approximate
size of the Earth was well known as well.

To estimate the size of the Sun Posidonius also did something similar as
Eratosthenes had done.  You might remember that Eratosthenes had noticed that
in the Egyptian town of Syene, the Sun cast no shadows on the summer solstice.
Posidonius made an even stronger assumption than this and claimed that this was
true in a region around the city with a diameter of 300 stades, or about 47
kilometers.  Where Posidonius got this information we do not know.  But he
argued that this implies that some part of the Sun is directly above every part
of this 300 stade region around Syene.  This means that you can then draw a
cone from the center of the Earth, through this circle around Syene, out to the
Sun.  If you know the size of the Earth and the distance to the Sun, this would
tell you the size of the Sun.  Now lucky for Posidonius he already had a
measurement of the size of the Earth on hand, but he actually doesn't use it.
He instead used a value of 300,000 stades rather than the 240,000 that he had
measured.  He probably did this to keep the numbers nice and round, but it also
does suggest that he probably wasn't super confident in his own results.  Well
what about the second part --- he also needed to know the distance to the Sun.
For this, he just assumed that the distance to the Sun was 10,000 times the
radius of the Earth.  The only basis for this assumption was that Archimedes
had made the same assumption in the Sand-Reckoner when he was trying to
estimate how many grains of sand could fit in the universe.  But Archimedes, in
turn, had no real basis for this assumption.  So, with no real justification,
Posidonius just assumed that the Sun was 10,000 times farther away than the
radius of the Earth and ended up with a diameter of the Sun of 3,000,000 stades.
Well Posidonius ended up getting closer to the true diameter of the Sun than he
had any right to be given that he essentially made up one of the numbers in his
measurement and the technique as a whole is fairly dubious.  His value of
3,000,000 stades would correspond to a diameter of about 500,000 kilometers,
which is less than a factor of 3 smaller than its modern value of 1.4 million
kilometers.  Not bad for being, in effect, a blind guess.

Well, this is mostly the extent of Posidonius's astronomy, at least his
contributions to astronomy that aren't really embarrassing.  He also did make
an estimate of the distance to the Moon but it relies on even sketchier
arguments if you can believe it.  There is much more that could be said of
Posidonius the philosopher, he was one of the greatest intellects of his day
and made contributions to a huge number of different fields, mathematics,
history, ethics, geology and really all the branches of knowledge of the time.
But we must move on to explore the rest of the vast wasteland that is Greek
astronomy during the Roman Era.

After Posidonius died around 50 BC there are really no astronomers of note for
about two centuries.  Now I don't want to mislead you with the impression that
there was no astronomy at all in the intervening two centuries.  That is
certainly not the case.  We have various artifacts that show that astronomy was
indeed still practiced throughout this time, there are star charts, almanacs
were drawn up, and after all people still needed to keep track of the calendar.
There are some physical artifacts like celestial globes which were probably
used to teach astronomy.  And of course horoscopes from the time survive as
well.  But there wasn't really anything new here.  The astronomers of this
period seem to have just been following the techniques developed by earlier
astronomers and developed no new techniques of their own.  As a consequence
very few of their names survive.  Ptolemy records that an astronomer named
Agrippa observed an occultation of the Pleiades by the Moon in 92 AD, but other
than that nothing about this fellow is known.  Ptolemy also says that Menelaus
of Alexandria observed occultation of the stars Spica and Acrab by the Moon
when he was in Rome in 98 AD.  We know a little more about the work of Menelaus
since he developed the mathematics of spherical geometry in a book called
Sphaerica which does survive.  Although his motivation for studying spherical
geometry was its application to astronomy, today he is more remembered as a
mathematician than an astronomer.

All that said, while it appears that the astronomers of this period could do
the basic things required of their job, generate almanacs, predict lunar
eclipses, update the calendar, and so forth, some of the more cutting edge
discoveries from earlier times had gotten a bit garbled.  In particular,
Hipparchus's discovery of the precession of the equinoxes seems to have been
either misunderstood, disbelieved, or ignored by many subsequent astronomers.
Hipparchus had claimed that the position of the vernal equinox drifted westward
at a rate of more than a degree per century.  But other astronomers, left
nameless in the sources, instead said that the location of the equinoxes
oscillates.  It drifts westward over the course of 640 years and then turns
around and goes back the other way for another 640 years.  And, in particular,
they said that precession had reversed itself in the year 158 BC.  Now how
they came up with this bizarre theory requires a bit of speculation, but
needless to say, they don't come out looking good.  What probably happened is
that long ago Eudoxus had placed the location of the vernal equinox 8 degrees
into the constellation Aries since this was consistent with the way that the
Babylonians had marked the signs of the zodiac.  Remember that in the ancient
world, the locations of the constellations were not as precisely determined as
they are today.  Much later Pliny had done the same thing and put the vernal
equinox 8 degrees into the constellation Aries.  But midway in between these
two, Hipparchus had put the location of the vernal equinox at the beginning of
the constellation of Aries, not 8 degrees in.  So probably some astronomers saw
this variation and assumed that it implied that the locations of the equinoxes
oscillated about, with the reversal occurring around the time that Hipparchus
was active.  The problem, though, is that the boundaries of the zodiac were not
well defined in the sky.  Their location was set by the location of the
equinoxes, not the other way around.  Hipparchus had just used a different
convention than earlier and later astronomers, so this 8 degree discrepancy was
unrelated to the true precession of the equinoxes.

And so with that we can just hop lightly over a period of about two hundred
years and arrive at the last major figure in Greek astronomy --- Claudius
Ptolemy.  In terms of the longevity of his influence it is hard to find any
other scientist throughout history who beats Ptolemy.  The model of the
planetary motions that Ptolemy proposed stood virtually unchanged and
unchallenged for nearly 1500 years.  He and Plato were the only two figures out
of the dozens I have discussed in the history of Greek astronomy, whose works
were continually read, commented upon, and taught, maybe excepting Homer and
Hesiod if we're going to be generous and count them as astronomers.  So it is
sad to say that for such an influential astronomer we know next to nothing about
him personally.  His reputation stands on the weight of his work alone.  For
all intents and purposes, Ptolemy is simply the author of the Almagest and the
Tetrabiblos and nothing more.

We can infer that he lived in the 2nd century AD based on the dates of some
observations he records in the Almagest.  His first observation was in 127 AD
and his last was in 150 and he made his observations in Alexandria, so it is
assumed that that is where he lived.  Given that his name was Ptolemy and lived
in Alexandria you might suppose that he was a member of the Ptolemaic dynasty,
and some later medieval scholars did make this assumption, but there is no
evidence for it.  He was probably a Roman citizen since Claudius is a Roman
name, and his family had probably been Roman citizens for several generations
since oftentimes families would take as a Roman name the name of the emperor
who extended them citizenship, and Claudius was emperor in the middle of the
1st century AD.  You might think that it's a bit unfair to the Romans that I'm
including him in with the Greeks rather than showcasing him as the greatest
Roman astronomer to ever live, but although he was a Roman citizen, the Romans
by this point were no longer as picky as they once had been about extending
citizenship to foreigners in conquered lands.  So although legally he was a
Roman citizen, culturally, he was almost certainly coming out of the
Hellenistic tradition.

Well if we can't say much about Ptolemy the man we at least have to say much
about Ptolemy's works.  And fortunately there is a great deal to say there.
Ptolemy has the excellent fortune of having had almost all of his works survive
in complete form.  Sometimes it survives in a Latin or Arabic translation
rather than the Greek original, and sometimes those translations are of dubious
quality, but nevertheless that's doing head and shoulders better than almost
any other figure from antiquity.

Ptolemy continues a trend that we've been seeing in that his works are very
specialized.  Most of the early Greek philosophers I talked about, Pythagoras,
Heraclitus, Parmenides, Aristotle, they were interested in just about
everything.  And of course everything includes astronomy, so they wrote about
astronomy.  But as we start to get into the Hellenistic Era, generally speaking
astronomers became more specialized.  Astronomers like Apollonius or
Aristarchus would write about sister subjects like mathematics or geography,
but they generally weren't writing so much about, say, ethics or epistemology.
Now, after saying all this I have to caveat it that this is a generalization
and there were exceptions.  Thales, the first Greek astronomer I talked about
is really only known for his astronomy.  And I just spent the first half of
this episode telling you about Posidonius, who was interested in just about
everything under the Sun, along with the Sun itself for good measure.  But
Ptolemy's works are very much in line with the kinds of works one would expect
from an astronomer working toward the end of antiquity.  He writes about
astronomy, of course, but his other works are on closely related subjects.  He
wrote a book on optics, a book on geography, and a work on mathematics.  To
modern eyes the one work that would seem a little bit out of place is called
Harmonikon and concerned music theory.  But given the prevailing philosophies
of the time, this was not really far outside his domain of expertise.  Music
theory in ancient Greece was intimately associated with the mathematics of
ratios, the main question of the day being how determine the set of musical
intervals that would produce the most harmonious music.

But really there is just one work that Ptolemy is known for, and this is, of
course, the Almagest.  Really its original Greek title was Mathematike
Syntaxis, which translates roughly to Mathematical Treatise.  This was a bit of
a banal title, which later astronomers felt was ill-suited to a work of its
scope and influence, so it came to be known as the Great Treatise since it
represented the culmination of the whole of Greek astronomy.  During the
Islamic Golden Age, the work was translated into Arabic and the informal title,
the Great Treatise also made its way into the Arabic title, Al-Majisti, which
drops the rather self-evident treatise part, and left us with the superlative
title, The Greatest.  Once the work made its way back to the West it retained a
Latinized version of this Arabic title, going from Al-Majisti, to The Almagest.
Though, to be a bit pedantic, calling it The Almagest is a bit redundant, like
saying an ATM machine, since the article "al" in Arabic means The.  So saying
The Almagest literally would translate to The The Greatest.  That said it's not
the most redundant title out there.  That honor would have to go to the Battle
of The El-Alamein, which would literally translate to the Battle of the the the
Amein.

Anyway before we get into the meat of the text I would be remiss if I didn't
relate the motto that Ptolemy begins his work with because it is really quite
charming:

> In studying the convoluted orbits of the stars my feet do not touch the
> Earth, and, seated at the table of Zeus himself, I am nurtured with celestial
> ambrosia.

Well the book begins by laying out same basic assumptions or axioms that will
be the foundation for the planetary theory that makes up the bulk of the work.
These assumptions should be familiar to us by now.  He assumes that the heavens
are a sphere centered upon the Earth.  This is clear because if the heavens
were centered somewhere other than the Earth, the stars would not trace circles
in the sky as we observe them to do.  Furthermore, the Earth is a sphere which
does not rotate.  Now he does consider the possibility that the Earth might
rotate and actually acknowledges that this would make for a far simpler model.
But he decides that it cannot be so basically on Aristotelian grounds.  Earth
is, after all, the heaviest element, and if the Earth were rotating the
heaviest element would be moving faster than the air or aether, which is far
lighter.  Moreover, the exceedingly rapid motion of the Earth would cause great
winds, and because the Earth would be rotating so quickly from west to east, we
should never observe anything in the sky like birds or clouds move in the
direction of the east.  We see birds fly east or west with equal probability.
How can this happen if the Earth is moving so rapidly in one direction as this
hypothesis suggests.  So, Ptolemy discards that hypothesis and concludes that
more complicated a hypothesis or not, the Earth just does not rotate.

Now the Almagest was quite comprehensive in its scope, but it was most
influential for its theory of planetary orbits so let's start there.  Ptolemy,
of course, is closely associated with the theory of epicycles, but as I talked
about in Episode 20, the theory of epicycles had been around for something like
300 years by this point, perhaps originating with Apollonius of Perga, or
perhaps an earlier astronomer.  To recap the basic theory of epicycles up until
Ptolemy, the idea was that each planet revolved around a little circle called
an epicycle, and the center of the epicycle, in turn, revolved in a great big
circle around the Earth, called the deferent.  For the superior planets, the
period of the motion on the deferent was sidereal period, and for the inferior
planets it was one year.  And for all the planets, the motion along the
epicycle had a period equal to the synodic period of the planet.

This basic theory was really quite good at explaining the main features of the
planetary motions.  It explained the retrograde motion that was seen once a
year, it predicted the positions of the planets quite well, and it even
accounted for other features like the fact that planets would get brighter at
opposition, because according to the epicycle model, they would then be closer
to the Earth.  But in Episode 21 we learned that Hipparchus had noticed a
problem with the basic epicycle model.  Since everything is moving in perfect
circles the motion should be exactly periodic.  But Hipparchus noticed that
the retrograde motion was not quite uniform.  Sometimes the planet travelled
backwards a different distance.  And the time spent in retrograde motion varied
as well.  Not by much, but enough to be noticeable.  Sadly, Hipparchus lacked
the data to really do anything more than notice that there was a problem.  But
Ptolemy, working 300 years later, had more data to draw upon.

To model these variations in retrograde motion, Ptolemy introduced a new
concept to the epicycle model, called the equant.  In the original model, the
center of the epicycle moved uniformly around the deferent, which was a perfect
circle centered on the Earth.  Ptolemy offset this circle from the Earth a
little bit.  But that wasn't all.  Ptolemy then placed a point on the opposite
side from the center of the deferent as the Earth.  This point he called the
equant.  Ptolemy then threw out the basic assumption that had been a part of
Greek astronomy since the time of Plato, that orbits consist of uniform
circular motions.  Instead, he said that the planet appeared to move uniformly
when viewed at the location of the equant, rather than at the center of the
deferent.  In other words, the angular velocity of the planet would be constant
relative to the equant, but would vary relative to the center of its orbit.

The consequence of this is that each planet's orbit gained a kind of
eccentricity, eccentricity literally meaning out of the center.  Not exactly
the same eccentricity as an ellipse has, but the offset circle produced a
behavior that was very similar.  Due to this offset and the variable angular
velocity, a planet's motion would not be constant over time, sometimes it would
be faster, and sometimes slower.  Moreover, because sometimes the epicycle
would be closer to the Earth, it would appear larger, and the planet would
travel a larger distance in retrograde motion.  Other times, the epicycle would
be on the other side of the equant and it would appear smaller, producing less
retrograde motion.

So this, in its bare bones, is the theory of epicycles, deferents, and equants,
which Ptolemy created and stood more or less unchallenged for some 1400 years.
Ptolemy's theory has a reputation for being fearsomely complicated, but really
the mechanics of it are quite straightforward, even if they are admittedly a
little weird.  You have planet moving in a little circle, and that little
circle moves in a big circle somewhat offset from the Earth.  But it doesn't
move uniformly about that circle, it instead moves in such a way that its
angular motion is uniform with respect to a point on the opposite side of the
center of the deferent from the Earth.  That is all there is to it.  So what
are we to make of this theory?

Well there are two ways we can approach it.  First I think it would be
worthwhile to see how it fits in with our modern understanding of the orbits of
the planets.  Now of course since the time of Kepler our understanding of
planetary motions is that the plants move in elliptical orbits where one focus
is centered on the Sun.  But the motion along the ellipse is not uniform.
According to Kepler's second law, the planets sweep out equal areas in equal
times, so when they are closer to the Sun they move faster and when they are
farther from the Sun they move more slowly.

So with that in mind, the purpose of the epicycle is quite clear.  In Ptolemy's
theory, all the planets revolved about the Earth, but in reality, they revolve
about the Sun, as does the Earth.  The epicycle is nothing more than the
orbital motion of the Earth superimposed upon the planet.  The relationship
between the epicycle and the Earth's orbit was unfortunately obscured by the
way that Greek astronomers measured the periods of motions about the epicycle.
For them, they measured the period from the time that the planet was closest to
Earth on the epicycle to the next time that it was closest to Earth on the
epicycle.  But because the epicycle was moving around the deferent as this was
happening, and all the planets moved at different speeds around their
deferents, they all had different periods.  But if instead you measure the
motion about the epicycle relative to the background stars, you find that it is
exactly one year for all the planets.  So the epicycle essentially served to
transform a heliocentric system into a geocentric system.

Okay, so what about Ptolemy's main innovation, the equant, what is that doing?
In the original theory, all the motions were perfectly circular.  But today we
know that the orbits of the planets are not circular, they are elliptical.
Now, it turns out that the orbits aren't *very* elliptical.  If I drew the
orbit of Mars, which has a fairly high eccentricity, you'd have a hard time
telling it apart from a circle.  But the fact that the orbits are not quite
circular manifests itself in two ways.  The retrograde motion we see in the
superior planets happens when the Earth overtakes a planet in its orbit.  But
because the orbits are a little elliptical, sometimes the planet is a little
closer to Earth and sometimes it's a little farther away.  If it happens to be
closer you'd expect to see more retrograde motion, and if it's farther you'd
expect to see less.  This is pretty well modeled by taking the center of the
circle of the planet's orbit and shifting it a little bit away from the Earth.  

This then leaves the last part of the theory, the uniform motion about the
equant, what's going on there?  By shifting the center of the orbit of the
planet away from the Earth, we have actually created a reasonable approximation
of an elliptical orbit, at least for orbits that aren't too eccentric.
Shifting the center away from the Earth now puts the Earth at one of the foci
of the ellipse.  Now, of course, in reality the Sun is at one of the two foci,
but we have essentially used the epicycle to swap the Earth and the Sun.  But,
what is still unaccounted for is Kepler's second law, namely that the planet
does not move uniformly on its orbit.  Now, back in school, when you first
learned about the planets moving in elliptical orbits and that the Sun was at a
focus of the ellipse, you may have wondered, well, an ellipse has two foci ---
the Sun is at one focus, but what's going on at the other focus?  Usually the
response is that there's nothing special about the second focus.  From a
physical perspective this is true, there's no special gravity or anything at
the second focus.  But, the second focus in an elliptical orbit does have one
special property.  It turns out that, at least for modest eccentricities, if
you sit at the second focus and observe the planet's motion around you, you
will see that it is approximately uniform.  The math to derive this is a little
annoying but it all falls out of Kepler's laws.  At the second focus of an
elliptical orbit, the angular velocity of the planet is approximately uniform.
So, with this in mind, the purpose of the equant immediately becomes clear.  In
modern terms, the Earth is at one focus of a planet's elliptical orbit, and the
equant is at the other.  As such the orbital motion of the planet is uniform
about the equant, not the center of the deferent.  So, really rather remarkably
for a theory that gets a lot of things fundamentally wrong, Ptolemy's model of
planetary motion captures the main features of the true, elliptical orbits of
the planets.  It gets the retrograde motions about right, along with their
variations, and it gets the non-uniform motions of the planets about right as
well.

So, this then brings us to the second way we can try to understand Ptolemy's
model --- through his own eyes.  How did Ptolemy manage to come up with this
idea?  Now, unfortunately he does not just come out and tell us.  But we can
kind of reverse engineer how he might have gone about it.  The biggest problem
he had to solve was the variable retrograde motion, and that problem had a
fairly straightforward solution.  Shift the center of the planet's orbit away
from the Earth, and boom, problem solved.  Sometimes the planet is close and
there's more retrograde motion, and other times it's farther away and there's
less.  But how did he come up with the idea of the equant?  What probably
happened is that he had also known that the planet's overall motion,
independent of the retrograde motions, was not uniform.  Now, once again, there
is a simple solution to this --- just shift the planet's circular orbit away
from the Earth.  This would make it appear to move non-uniformly when viewed on
the Earth.  But then when he went to actually calculate the magnitude of these
offsets he would have found that they didn't match.  In fact, the offset needed
to explain the non-uniformity of the planet's motion would have been twice the
offset needed to explain the variation in the size of the retrograde motions.
Having been presented with these two conflicting offsets, he may have just
smushed them together.  The physical center of the planet's orbit was the
smaller offset and explained the variation in the size of the retrograde
motion, but then he imposed a uniform motion about the second offset to explain
the non-uniformity in the epicycle's progress across the sky relative to the
Earth.  Since the planet only needed to be physically closer for one of these
offsets, this hack basically held together, even if it did more or less abandon
the centuries-old principle that the planetary motions had to be explained
using uniform circular motions.  Now at this point I think it's worth noting
that I don't think there is much evidence that there was something sacred about
this particular requirement, that planetary models had to be composed of
uniform circular motions, if we can even call it a requirement.  It started all
the way back with Plato who, of course had his own philosophical justifications
for preferring such models.  But centuries later, by the time we get to
Ptolemy, and even in the earlier time of Apollonius or Hipparchus, it's not
really clear that they were philosophically wedded to this idea.  More probably
the reason that uniform circular motions dominated Greek planetary models is
that uniform circular motions are really, really easy to work with.  Modern
mathematical concepts that we take for granted like algebraic geometry and
trigonometry, were not well developed in ancient Greece.  When you read the
original texts, these astronomers had to spend pages and pages in intricate
geometrical arguments to prove propositions that we could do in a handful of
lines of trigonometry today, and in many cases ancient Greek astronomers
couldn't even get exact results, but could only calculate approximations.  But
circles were something they could easily work with, so it's no surprise that
circles formed the foundation of their planetary models.

Now one detail that I've elided is that Ptolemy found that he did need to make
an extra tweak to get things to work for Mercury.  The inferior planets are a
bit trickier to model in a geocentric model because the epicycle now has to be
quite large since the planet is now on the inside of the Earth's orbit.  To
model Mercury's different amounts of greatest eastern and western elongations,
he had to put the center of the deferent on its own little orbit that had a
period that was one half the period of the epicycle around the deferent.  This
had the effect of turning Mercury's orbit into an oval shape which more closely
approximated its true elliptical shape.  Even still, the model didn't do a
great job with Mercury which is a tricky planet to model anyway --- really it's
motion wasn't well explained until the 20th century with the development of the
general theory of relativity.  But fortunately for Ptolemy, it's also a tricky
planet to observe, it only appears low on the horizon right after sunset or
before sunrise, so the errors in the model would have been hard to detect.

Well, there is one other component to Ptolemy's planetary theory.  So far I
have only been talking about the ecliptic longitude of the planets, which, to
be fair, is the most prominent component of planetary motions.  The positions
of the planets are confined to the zodiac, but in addition to moving through
all the longitudes through the zodiac, they do also move north and south of the
ecliptic a little bit as well.  This latitudinal motion was essentially ignored
by Apollonius and Hipparchus, but Ptolemy does consider it.  What he does is he
orients the deferent of each planet at some angle relative to the ecliptic.
Now, this works pretty well, but the epicycle cannot be oriented at this angle
--- it is exactly parallel to the ecliptic.  This makes perfect sense in the
modern context, the epicycle is just the orbit of the Earth, so it has to be
exactly on the ecliptic.  But things couldn't be quite so simple for Ptolemy.
For whatever reason, he found it more natural for the epicycle to be inclined
at the *same* angle as the deferent, but then adds an additional, little
epicycle, oriented perpendicular to the ecliptic, which, in effect, keeps the
planet's motion along the epicycle parallel to the ecliptic.  For what it's
worth, Ptolemy himself recognized that this was not the most elegant theory.
He writes:

> Let nobody, looking at the imperfection of our human contrivances, regard the
> hypotheses here proposed as too artificial.  We must not compare human beings
> with things divine."  "The simplicity itself of celestial processes should
> not be judged according to what his held simple among men.

Ptolemy also discussed in some detail a theory of the Sun's orbital motion, but
there's not much to say on the subject because, perhaps surprisingly, Ptolemy
didn't really make any modifications to Hipparchus's models of the Sun's
motion.  He discusses the phenomenon of precession, but seems to have made it
into a nice round number, 1 degree / century, which was way too small.
Strangely, if you back out what the precession should have been from his star
catalog, you get a number that is much closer to the truth, 1 degree / 78
years, but for whatever reason Ptolemy did not use that value even though he
could have.  He also just continued to use Hipparchus's measurement of the
location of perihelion, the point in the Earth's orbit where it is closest to
the Sun, and where the Sun moves fastest on the sky.  This location gradually
changes over time, so over the three centuries between Ptolemy and Hipparchus,
his assumption about where perihelion was came to be more than 5 degrees off.
Taken all together, all these inaccuracies meant that Ptolemy's solar
calculations were not very good.  He could be off by as much as 1 and a half
degrees which is really quite a lot and could have been measured by him fairly
easily.  It's hard to say why his solar theory is so much worse than his
planetary model and lunar theory.  It's possible that he just had less interest
in precision measurements of the Sun's position or that he lacked the equipment
to do them.

Well the last celestial body to model is the Moon, and unlike with the Sun,
Ptolemy made some real advances here.  As with everything else, he started with
Hipparchus's epicycle model as his foundation.  But he noticed that
Hipparchus's epicycle model of the Moon was not always quite accurate.  The
position of the Moon would line up with the prediction at new moon and full
moon, but it could be off during first and third quarters.  But even then, it
wasn't always off, just sometimes.  But when it was, the moon could be more
than two and a half degrees away from where it was supposed to be according to
Hipparchus.

Today this phenomenon is called evection and it's understood to be due to
oscillations in the Moon's orbital parameters due to the gravitational torque
imposed by the Sun.  To model it, Ptolemy adopted a similar strategy that he
used for the planets.  He shifted the center of the Moon's orbit away from the
Sun, and similar to the orbit of Mercury, he then made the offset center
revolve around the Earth twice a month.  This added a sort of oval shape to the
Moon's orbit such that its position was identical to the original model at new
and full moon, but had an offset during first and third quarters.  Now, as a
model of the Moon's position, Ptolemy's theory was remarkably successful.  It
incorporated what have turned out to be fairly subtle orbital phenomena.  But
as a physical model it was really quite garbage.  The offset that Ptolemy had
to shift the Moon's orbit by was so large that the Moon's distance to the Earth
would have varied by a factor of two.  So from first quarter to full moon you
would see the moon shrink to half its size, and then grow back to that size
from full moon to third quarter.  This clearly doesn't happen and Ptolemy must
have known it.  Given the various bells and whistles in Ptolemy's models, it
seems pretty clear that he did not exactly regard his models as being perfect
physical models of the heavens.  Rather, he seems to have been satisfied just
with being able to predict the positions of the planets on the sky.

So, now that we've seen Ptolemy's models for the motions of all the heavenly
bodies it's worth stepping back for a moment and asking why it was that the
geocentric model persisted for so long.  With the benefit of hindsight, we can
see that there were some pretty massive clues lurking in Ptolemy's model that
the Sun was at the center of things.  If he had measured the period of the
epicycles, he would have seen that the period of every planet around its
epicycle was exactly one year, just the same as the period of the Sun around
the Earth, and this is exactly what you'd expect to see if everything were
revolving around the Sun.  Furthermore, the inclination of the epicycle was
different from the inclination of the deferent, and was the same for all of the
planets --- again, exactly what you'd expect if the Earth were going around the
Sun.  More generally, modeling the changes in the ecliptic latitudes was very
difficult to do in his geocentric model.  Since the orbits of the planets are
inclined relative to a point centered on the Sun and not on the Earth, when
viewed from the Earth, the whole orbit is offset from the ecliptic, but this
offset disappears when the Sun is taken as the center of the system.  Lastly
the motion of the inferior planets was pretty hard to square with a geocentric
theory.  If you go and calculate where the center of Venus's epicycle is, you'd
find that it is in exactly the same position as the Sun itself.  So there were
plenty of clues that the Sun was at the center of things.  But, many of these
clues can really only be appreciated in retrospect.  The center of Venus's
epicycle was indeed the location of the Sun, but just from looking at the
parameters of his model, it doesn't seem that Ptolemy noticed that this was the
case.  It's not obvious.  In order to discover that the offset of the orbits
from the zodiac could be eliminated if the planets were centered on the Sun
Ptolemy would have had to try to do that calculation, and he didn't really have
any reason to try it in the first place.  More broadly, today we may look at
this model and see the influence of the Sun cropping up in the motions of all
the planets, and thereby conclude that it would be simpler if the Sun were at
the center of the system.  But this isn't always true.  The influence of the
Sun also shows up in the Moon's orbit in Ptolemy's model, but we can't conclude
from that that the Moon revolves around the Sun.  So although there are a lot
of clues pointing you towards a heliocentric model, it's understandable that
Ptolemy might not have noticed them.  What is maybe less understandable is that
no one noticed that things could be simplified in a heliocentric system for
another 1400 years, but that probably has more to do with broader social
factors than anything else.  Ptolemy's work was very, very hard to understand
and from late antiquity through the middle ages, there just weren't a lot of
people who were intimately familiar with it and could propose fundamentally new
approaches to doing things.  But I will have to save a more complete discussion
of that subject for when we get to astronomy in the Middle Ages.

Well, although the bulk of the Almagest is concerned with these various models
of planetary or lunar motion, in the middle of the treatise Ptolemy also
includes a fairly extensive stellar catalog.  It's generally believed that the
bulk of Ptolemy's star catalog was essentially copied from Hipparchus's
original star catalog 300 years earlier.  The main reason for this supposition
is that Ptolemy definitely knew about precession as he talks about it in his
work.  But around 800 stars in his catalog have the wrong position.  They're
about 1 degree off from where they should be.  It seems that what had happened
is that Ptolemy took Hipparchus's measurements, and then applied a correction
for precession.  But he assumed that the rate of precession was 1 degree per
century, when in fact it is more like one degree every 72 years.  Over the
course of 300 years, he ended up about a degree off.  Scholars have also
noticed that the positions of most of the stars in the catalog are given in
intervals of a sixth of a degree, but some of them are given at fourths of a
degree.  This seems to indicate that separate instruments were used for those
different stars.

Well, in addition to the positions of the stars in his catalog, Ptolemy also
singles six stars out and gives them a color.  In the Greek he calls them
"hypokirros" which literally translates to yellowish.  There is an interesting
strand of scholarship that puzzles over the bizarre ways in which the ancient
Greeks described colors.  In the 19th century a popular theory was that ancient
Greeks were colorblind.  The most famous example is probably from Homer, who
consistently describes the color of the sea as "wine dark" even though today we
would call the sea blue, or maybe greenish-blue, but certainly not the color of
a red wine.  And Homer also describes the sky as bronze which seems even more
implausible.

Well, in the case of Ptolemy, the six stars he gives a yellowish color to are
Aldebaran, Betelgeuse, Arcturus, Antares, Pollux, and Sirius.  Today we would
describe the first five of these as red, not yellow, and in fact they are
literally called today red giants.  Sirius is the odd man out in this list.
It's the brightest star in the night sky and is very distinctly blue.  It's a
little hard to explain why Ptolemy describes it as yellowish and puts in the
same category as an extremely red star like Antares, which is so red that its
name literally means "rival of Mars."  To confuse matters even further, Ptolemy
isn't the only one to do this.  Many ancient sources describe Sirius as being
red, yellow, or copper colored.  Up through the 19th century, some astronomers
hypothesized that the color of the star had actually changed since ancient
times.  In antiquity perhaps it really was yellow or red and then at some point
changed to blue.  Now our understanding of modern astrophysics tells us that
stars generally do in fact change their color over the course of their
lifetime, but a change in the color of Sirius in particular in a time span of
just 2000 years is far too rapid and is definitively ruled out by modern
stellar theory.  And for what it is worth, Sirius wasn't universally described
as yellow or reddish.  The poet Marcus Manilius described Sirius as azure blue.
And in the ancient world, the colors assigned to stars weren't necessarily a
literal physical color as we would use it today, but were oftentimes
representative of an astrological character.  So certain stars were sometimes
described as black even though that would be physically impossible if for no
other reason than the star just couldn't be observed.

Well there are a few other bits and bobs in the Almagest, Ptolemy goes through
a measurement of the distance to the Sun, but it's fairly similar to the
technique that Hipparchus used, just a lot more complicated so it's not really
worth going into.  The whole book is several hundred pages long and very
dense, so I've had to just pick out the highlights from it.  Although it never
went out of print, so to speak, it is a difficult enough text that it was one
of those books that fell into the category of being more admired than read.
Everyone had heard of it, but it was only deeply understood by a very few.

There is one other work of Ptolemy's that is worth commenting on, and this is
the Tetrabiblos, written at the end of his life.  Tetrabiblos literally means
"four books," which as a title doesn't really tell you very much, except, I
guess, to keep going after you finish the first one.  But, to be fair, after
writing a book that literally ended up with the title "the greatest," anything
after that was going to be a bit of a let down.

The Tetrabiblos is the companion text to the Almagest.  The Almagest was a
complete treatise of known astronomy at the time, and the Tetrabiblos was a
complete treatise of known astrology of the time.  At this point I think it's
worth pausing and getting up to speed a little bit on the state of astrology in
late antiquity.  Back in the early episodes I spent a fair amount of time
talking about Babylonian astrology.  Their approach to astrology was rather
different than how we think of astrology today.  To the Babylonians, the gods
would place signs in the sky which the wise could read to understand what was
happening in the world.  The gods, of course, were only concerned with the
grandest of human affairs --- astrological omens would portend wars, famines,
the death of a king and so forth.  The gods weren't going to bother putting up
a sign in the heavens for a peasant like you.

Now, over the course of the Hellenistic Era, there was increasing cultural
contact between the Greeks and the Babylonians, though by this point they are
often called the Chaldeans.  One of the results of this was that astrology
started to play an increased role in Greek society.  But there was a problem
with the Babylonian philosophy of astrology.  To them, the gods would place a
sign in the heavens as an omen of an upcoming event.  These signs were usually
lunar or solar eclipses, a planet going retrograde in a particular
constellation, or a planetary conjunction.  But by this point, Greek
astronomers had more or less figured all these things out.  They had models of
lunar and solar eclipses and models of planetary motions.  These couldn't be a
sign that the gods placed in the skies because the gods weren't really choosing
to do anything at all --- the planets obeyed regular laws that astronomers knew
about.  So the interpretation of astrology shifted.  Rather than events in the
heavens being a sign from the gods, the heavens themselves came to have a
causal impact on life here on Earth.  And this interpretation had a
democratizing consequence because the heavens hang above us all equally.  The
Babylonian gods could only be bothered to put up signs for the rich and famous.
But if a planet's position in the sky was having some causal influence on us
here on Earth, it would have that influence on all of us just the same, prince
or pauper.  So, as astrology permeated into Greek culture, it began to develop
a more individualistic flavor.

Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos reflects both these approaches to astrology.  His first
book is in essence a defense of the practice of astrology and an exposition of
the basic principles that motivate it.  One of the principle criticisms of
astrology today is that astrologers have a pretty poor track record of actually
predicting anything.  But this argument isn't exactly modern.  Ancient
astrologers also had a pretty poor track record of predicting anything and
their failures to predict anything didn't go unnoticed.  Ptolemy nevertheless
defends the practice essentially by saying that life is messy and complicated.
The heavens can provide a subtle influence, but this can be overwhelmed by
random, unrelated circumstances.  We can predict, for example that on average
June will be warmer than May, but that doesn't rule out the possibility of a
cold spell in June.  Similarly, we should be able to predict certain general
patterns on an individual's temperament based on the influence of the heavens
at the time of their birth, but this doesn't rule out deviations from this
pattern due to random events in their life.

One of the main ways that Ptolemy's astrology worked, which persisted into the
middle ages, at least in its general approach, was by collecting pairs of
opposing attributes and assigning those attributes to the different planets.
So Mars is associated with the attribute of dryness, which leads to a
destructive, evil influence, whereas Jupiter is associated with the attribute
of moistness, which is conducive to growth.

The second book of the Tetrabiblos is more in the line of the traditional
Babylonian style of astrology and is called "mundane astrology."  Here Ptolemy
examines the influence of the heavens on entire groups of people.  Some of this
is more or less accurate.  Ptolemy says that people who live at lower latitudes
have darker skin and thick curly hair to protect them from greater heat, and
those at higher latitudes have fairer skin and thinner hair.  But he also
divides the world into four quarters, each of which are ruled by varying
degrees by different planets.  In the northwest, which for Ptolemy included
Spain and Britain, the dominant planets were Jupiter and Mars, both of which
were masculine and domineering.  As a consequence Ptolemy claimed that these
people were independent and martial and the men had a low regard for
relationships with women.

The third book gets into the more individualistic Greek style of astrology and
covers what you think of when you imagine astrology today.  Given the date,
time, and location of an individual's birth, how do you construct a horoscope
to predict qualities of the individual's personality and what the nature of
their life will be --- will they live a long time, have good fortune, so so
forth.

The last book has to do with what we would maybe call "Advanced Topics."  For
example, how do you combine the horoscopes from two different individuals to
see whether or not a man and woman will be a good match?  At the end of the
book, Ptolemy then describes how the influence of the planets changes over the
course of one's life.  According to Ptolemy, a person's life can be divided
into seven stages, each of which is associated with a particular planet,
starting with the closest one, the Moon, and ending with the most distant,
Saturn.  So at the beginning of one's life is the period of infancy, which is
associated with the Moon.  Just as the body rapidly grows in infancy, of all
the celestial objects the Moon is the one that most rapidly grows and wanes.
Following infancy is the period of childhood which is associated with the
planet Mercury.  Mercury was seen as the lightest and flightiest of the
planets, since it is relatively faint and seen to flit back and forth between
either side of the Sun.  In the same way, children run around and are at one
moment concerned with one thing and in the next forget about it and move on to
something else.  Around puberty, one enters the period of youth and the
dominant influence becomes the planet Venus.  Consequently, for the first time
one's thoughts turn to love.  After coming of age, one enters the period of
young adulthood where the dominant influence is the Sun.  Now one's life is
characterized by vigor, work, and people start to take you seriously.  After a
period of about 20 years, one then enters into late adulthood where the
dominant planet shifts to Mars.  Now, one's demeanor becomes more severe.  One
has certain goals one wants to accomplish in life and realizes that there is
not as much time to accomplish them as one would like.  Around one's mid 50s
one enters into maturity, characterized by Jupiter with the attributes of
gravitas and respect, one has achieved a position of authority in the
community.  And finally, by one's late 60s, one enters into old age,
characterized by Saturn, the god of time, and grows slower and weaker.

So with that, we have the zenith of Greek astronomy in the works of Ptolemy.
Greek intellectual life trundles on through the Roman Era for another couple of
centuries before the Western Empire falls, but there are no more Greek
astronomers anywhere close to the stature of a Ptolemy or Apollonius, let alone
a Hipparchus.  Of course, astronomers still existed through this period, there
was Porphyry of Tyre and Martianus Capella, and, in fact, many of the authors
of the surviving sources on early Greek astronomy lived during late antiquity.
And I can't end this episode without at least mentioning the astronomer Hypatia
who edited part of the Almagest and was murdered by a Christian mob.  But given
that we've spent this episode on the best that Greek astronomy achieved, I want
to end this episode on a high note, so the sad story of Hypatia will have to
wait for a future episode.

But now that after 17 episodes we have finished with Greek astronomy, where
will this podcast go next?  In the next month I would like to swing back and
catch up with a culture which has rudely butted into the story on Greek
astronomy from time to time, namely the Romans.  I hope you'll join me then.
Until the next full moon, good night and clear skies.

## Additional references

* Freeman, Philip, The Philosopher and the Druids
