---
categories: episode
date: '2023-07-05'
description: Before getting back into Egyptian astronomy proper, we start by looking
  at Nabta Playa, a site of megalithic activity in the Nubian desert during the
  late neolithic. Then we turn to the megaliths the Egyptians are best known for
  \u2014 the pyramids. The pyramids have remarkably precise alignments to the cardinal
  directions and the techniques the Egyptians used to set these alignments remains
  a mystery. Finally, we look at the largest of the pyramids, Khufu's pyramid, whose
  so-called ventilation shafts have a possible astronomical connection.
keywords:
- astronomy
- history
- egypt
layout: episode
number: 31
title: We Need to Talk About Khufu
---

## Transcript

Good evening and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon.  My
name is Joe Antognini.

Well last month we took a fairly broad overview of Egyptian history and
geography and started to get into the astronomy of ancient Egypt by looking at
their cosmology and the ideas they had about the beginning and end of the
universe.  This month we'll continue to dive into Egyptian astronomy, but
before we really get into it I wanted to talk about a topic that I perhaps
should have discussed last episode just before getting to Egypt itself.  This
is a site called Nabta Playa and it's one of the more remarkable megalithic
sites not only in the Sahara but in entire world.  Now, Nabta Playa is a little
ways south of the city of Aswan which sits on the first cataract of the Nile,
so strictly speaking, it's really a Nubian monument rather than Egyptian, so if
I were very strict about policing the boundaries of the subjects of each
episode, it wouldn't quite fit in to an episode on Egyptian astronomy.  But
there's decent evidence that at least some of the people who built the
monuments at this site later migrated north into Egypt proper, so when we're
going this far back in time, these distinctions are a little arbitrary.

Now, unlike a monument like, say, Newgrange, which we discussed back in Episode
28, Nabta Playa isn't a single megalithic structure.  Rather it's a site that
was the center of megalithic activity for about two millennia, starting around
5500 BC and lasting until around 3400 BC.  This range of time might ring a bell
from back in Episode 29 when I was talking about the megaliths of the Saharan
desert, because this range lines up with the time frame that other megaliths
were constructed in the Sahara, which in turn corresponds with the period over
which the Sahara dried out and was transformed from arid grasslands to desert.

This region was inhabited by a people who are generically known as the Cattle
Herders, and one of the first clues that the Cattle Herders considered this a
special place is the fact that they buried cattle there.  Nabta Playa has the
largest density of cattle bones anywhere in the Nubian desert.  What makes this
particularly unusual is that the neolithic Cattle Herders did not, as a rule,
slaughter their cattle, much like the pastoralists of the region today.  Cows
were much too valuable to be slaughtered and eaten for their meat --- instead
they were kept alive for as long as possible for their milk and their blood.
Getting the milk is straightforward enough, but for the blood roughly once a
month they would cut a cow's vein, fill up a vessel with the blood, and then
patch up the wound, at least if modern day Maasai practices are any indication
of how it was done in the neolithic.  But the cattle bones at Nabta Playa
indicate that the animals there were slaughtered, which would have been a
rather significant affair.  In fact, the oldest tumulus at Nabta Playa, dating
back to around 5300 BC, contains the skeleton of an entire young cow, which was
an exceedingly valuable sacrifice for a pastoralist to make.

Archaeologists haven't only found the bones of cows at Nabta Playa.  There are
also a number of human skeletons buried there as well, all of which were placed
on their sides in a crouching position, oriented with their heads towards the
west and facing south.  Based on these skeletons archaeologists have been able
to infer that the people who lived in this region during the Neolithic were
generally of good health, especially when compared to the skeletons of the
later sedentary Egyptians.

Well the Nabta Playa site contains about 30 megaliths, but three in particular
stand out.  The best known is a megalith called Calendar Circle.  Now, calling
this structure a megalith is maybe overstating things a bit.  Perhaps it's more
appropriate to just call it a lith.  It's a circular arrangement of stones only
about 4 meters across and the stones that make it up aren't all that large,
they're all about 20 to 70 centimeters in length, so you could hold them in
your hand quite easily.  Several of these stones were put standing on their
end.  In fact, setting aside any astronomical connections, one of the most
remarkable things about Calendar Circle is how well it stayed intact for nearly
seven thousand years.  With something like Stonehenge you can see how it stayed
up over the years.  The stones are just huge!  You'd have to be really
motivated to tear part of it down, or there would have to be some truly
apocalyptic weather event to really impact the structure.  But with Calendar
Circle anyone could just come along and kick it over.  It's a testament to the
isolation and geological stability of the region that when Calendar Circle was
discovered in the early 1990s, eight of the standing stones were in their
original locations, and another six had just fallen over.  In fact, seven
millennia of exposure to the natural elements was nothing compared to just a
few years of exposure to people.  After its discovery, visitors to the site
kept adding random stones of their own, so after a few years the powers that be
decided it would be safer to remove the stones from their original site
altogether and reconstruct the original arrangement in a nearby museum.

Well, I've been saying that the structure is about 7 millennia old, but because
it's simply an arrangement of stones, there's no direct way to date them.
But there was a nearby hearth and the organic material in the hearth can be
dated using carbon-14 to around 4800 BC.

The circle itself consists of a series of mostly flat stones embedded in the
ground.  There are eight exceptions, however, eight stones which aren't flat,
but are rather narrow and were placed upright.  These come in four pairs, and
each pair sits on the opposite side of the circle from another pair.  These
pairs then form a set of so-called "gates," or entry points into the circle.
Then in the interior of the circle, the line going from one gate to the gate on
the opposite side is tracked by a line of pairs of upright rocks.  These gates
mark two alignments for the structure.  Now, because the whole thing is rather
small, the alignments are not extremely precise, but one of them traces the
north-south axis, and the other is in the direction of sunrise on the summer
solstice, or equivalently, sunset on the winter solstice.  The way that this
probably would have worked is that an individual would stand between the two
rocks on the eastern gate at sunrise.  When their shadow fell between the rocks
on the opposite gate it would be the solstice, or at least around the solstice
since there was probably a range of few days when this would happen.  In fact,
on occasion the Bedouin peoples of northern Africa continue to construct
similar kinds of calendar circles to this day and that is way that they use
them.  The second axis of the Calendar circle, the north-south axis, is
somewhat more remarkable because obtaining the direction of north with some
precision is, well, maybe not the most difficult task, but at least isn't
completely trivial, particularly since at the time when the Calendar Circle was
constructed there was no north star.

Well, about half a kilometer to the west is another structure, named Ring Hill,
which is one of the newest structures in the complex, dating to around
3500--3200 BC, so just prior to the first dynasty of Egypt.  It's quite a bit
larger than Calendar Circle, about 17 meters in diameter and contains a grave
with the skull of a three year old boy.  The structure consists of rings of
stones, of which the innermost ring is somewhat asymmetric and points towards
the east.

The last structure of particular note in Nabta Playa is to me the most
remarkable, but of the three structures I've talked about it was given the most
generic name: Complex Structure A.  The builders of this particular monument
dug a pit into the ground about two and a half meters deep.  There they seem to
have discovered a rather large rock made of quartzitic sandstone, about 3 and a
half meters by 2 and a half meters in size.  The rock probably had a rather
flat top to begin with, but the builders went to extra effort to smooth the top
of this stone.  Then they filled the pit back up with sand, and as they did so,
they suspended a second rock above the table rock in the sand.  This second
rock is known as the "cow stone," because it was shaped in a way that vaguely
resembles a cow, with a projecting bulge that looks like its head.  Then, with
the cow stone suspended above of the table stone, they completely filled the
pit with sand burying both the stones and added several large stones on top
above ground.  How the builders discovered this particular rock is something of
a mystery.  They would have had to have gone to some effort to dig deep enough
to find it, and the area is not conducive to groundwater, so it's unlikely that
they would have happened to have been digging wells in the area and
accidentally stumbled upon it.  But this structure seems to have been of some
significance for the people who built it not only because of the effort they
clearly went to to construct it, but due to its relationship with the
surrounding structures.  Many of the other megaliths at Nabta Playa were built
along three lines that radiate out from this structure.  What is rather
intriguing about these three radial lines is that they don't correspond to any
of the usual axes we see in megalithic structures like east-west, north-south,
or the solstice sunrise and sunsets.  However, if the structures were built in
the range of 4300--4100 BC, which is consistent with the available evidence,
then the first axis lines up with the point on the horizon where the star
Arcturus rises, which is the brightest star in the northern hemisphere.  The
second lines up with the location where the stars of Orion's belt rise, and the
third with the location where Sirius and Alpha Centauri rise, the brightest and
third brightest stars in the night sky, respectively.

Well, the ceremonial center at Nabta Playa appears to have been abandoned
around the middle of the 4th millennium BC, which, perhaps not coincidentally,
is when the desiccation process of the Sahara largely finished and the peoples
of the Sahara appear to have moved into more permanent settlements in the Nile
river valley, and recorded Egyptian history begins just a few centuries later.

So then, let's get back to the history of astronomy in Egypt proper.  The
oldest plausible reference to an astronomer in Egypt is a reference to none
other than Imhotep, one of the more remarkable of the earliest Egyptians, all
the more so since he wasn't a pharaoh.  Imhotep was a high official of the
pharaoh Djoser, of the 3rd dynasty, so he was kicking around very early on in
Egyptian history.  Over the centuries, Imhotep became revered for his wisdom
and acquired something of a mythical status in Egyptian religion, eventually to
the point of deification.  Now, Imhotep was credited with being wise in matters
of astronomy, but these references are a little late and somewhat more dubious, so I
can't really speak too much about his direct influence on Egyptian astronomy.
Instead, Imhotep was principally known for his abilities as a physician and
architect.  Of his abilities as physician the records that survive are purely
legendary, but his record as an architect can be seen much more tangibly as he
is credited with constructing the first pyramid.  Now, up until the time of the
Pharaoh Djoser, the pharaohs were entombed in a kind of structure that is today
called a "mastaba," but in ancient Egyptian was called a "per-djet," which
literally translates to "house of eternity."  You might recognize that last
part of the word, "djet," from our last episode, as being one of the ancient
Egyptian words for time, with the connotation of a linear, immutable eternity
that describes the end of the world.

Well a mastaba is a somewhat simple structure.  There were two chambers
underground, one of which was the tomb of the late pharaoh, and the other of
which contained offerings for the deceased so that he could live in luxury in
the afterlife: clothing, jewelry, food, beer, and so forth.  Above ground, the
tomb was covered with a rectangular slab made of mudbricks, a few meters tall.
The main characteristic of the mastaba was that the sides of the mastaba were
not vertical, but sloped inwards a little bit.

Imhotep's main architectural innovation, which then set off a construction
frenzy that produced one of Egypt's principal legacies, was to stack a number
of mastabas on top of each other, each somewhat smaller than the last.  This
transformed the tomb from a rectangular shape, to the first step pyramid in
ancient Egypt.  After Imhotep, later pharaohs took this design and refined it,
or probably more precisely, their unnamed architects took this design and
refined it.  Although it's not too hard to see the stacked mastaba structure of
Djoser's pyramid once you know to look for it, after a few generations, the
architects ditched this connection to their roots and the pyramids started to
be built towards the Platonic ideal of the pyramid shape that we all know and
love.

The pyramids are without a doubt the most prominent relic of ancient Egypt in
the popular consciousness, so I should probably say a few words about their
astronomical connections.  Now, one of the things to say about them is that
they are very, very old.  The Pyramids all date to the beginning of the Old
Kingdom.  The vast majority of them were constructed during the fourth dynasty,
around 2600--2500 BC and by the end of the sixth dynasty pharaohs had
essentially stopped constructing pyramids.  So although pyramids are the first
thing we think of when we think of ancient Egypt, there was actually a
only relatively short period of time in Egypt's long history when they built
them.

Part of the reason for their construction being rather short lived in the long
sweep of Egyptian history is that they were in some ways victims of their own
prominence.  The early pyramids at Giza were constructed not too far away from
the capital of Memphis where Upper Egypt and Lower Egypt meet, and they are
just tremendously large.  You really can't miss them.  And, of course, in
keeping with ancient Egyptian beliefs about the afterworld, these huge pyramids
were stuffed full of unimaginable riches for the dead pharaoh to enjoy in the
afterlife, gold, silver, jewels, you name it.  So it's perhaps not all that
surprising that right after these enormous monuments were erected and filled up
with enormous wealth, they were almost immediately robbed.  The pyramids ended
up acting as giant flashing neon advertisements telling everyone in the area
where all the valuables to steal were.  So, in the subsequent 24 dynasties,
pharaohs generally preferred to construct their tombs in somewhat more
out-of-the-way places and with less prominent exteriors.

Now, the pyramids of ancient Egypt are remarkable for a number of different
reasons, but from an astronomical perspective, certainly the most remarkable
feature is their alignment.  Now, I've been talking about various megaliths
across Europe and the Sahara for the past couple of episodes, and throughout
all this I've been remarking on the alignments of these monuments, how they are
not randomly oriented, but point in special, astronomically significant
directions like east and west, or towards the location of sunrise or sunset on
the solstice.  But the ancient Egyptian Pyramids take these alignments to an
entirely new level.  In the case of many of the megaliths I've talked about,
the alignment is certainly there, but it's generally not extremely precise.
For others it's not obvious in any individual cases, but can only be seen by
looking at the statistical distribution of orientations across many similar
megaliths.  But in the case of the ancient Egyptian pyramids, these alignments
are an order of magnitude better than anything that came before, and, in fact,
are better than anything that came after as well for probably more than a
millennium.  All the pyramids are aligned to the cardinal directions of
north-south-east-west to within half a degree, and in most cases, the alignment
is much better, averaging between 10 and 15 arcminutes.  In the case of the
largest pyramid, Khufu's Pyramid in the Giza complex, the discrepancy with the
cardinal directions is a mere 3 arcminutes.  To put this in perspective, the
base of the pyramid is 230 meters long, so this would mean that the northern
corner is only 20 centimeters east of north relative to the southern corner.

So, just how did the builders of these pyramids get them so well aligned?
Well, I wish I could tell you, as does every other Egyptologist.  But this is
perhaps one of the great mysteries in archaeoastronomy.  That said, although
the techniques of the ancient Egyptians are not known definitively, you won't
be surprised to hear that scholars have ideas.  Now, one of the clues that the
Egyptians inadvertently left us is in two rather surprising facts about the
alignments of the pyramids.  The first is that the discrepancies from the true
cardinal directions are not random.  Instead, the discrepancies are all biased
in the same direction, counterclockwise.  In other words, if you take a pyramid
and stand at its southwestern corner, and look north along the western side,
the alignment of this side won't point exactly to true north, but is slightly
to the west of north.  And if you then turn to your right and look along the
other side, east, this side doesn't point precisely east, but slightly north of
east.  And this holds for all of the pyramids.  The other, maybe even more
surprising fact, is that the alignments actually get worse over time.  The
oldest pyramids have the best alignments and subsequent pyramids have less
accurate alignments.  You might expect that as the Egyptians built more
pyramids they would have gotten better at it and the alignments would have
improved over time as they refined their techniques, but this isn't so.

What we do know for sure is that there was an apparently important ritual
associated with setting the alignment of the Pyramids and laying their
foundations, which is known as the "cutting of the cord ceremony."  This was
frequently depicted in tombs and shows how the Pharaoh would cut a cord and in
so doing would fix the alignment of the pyramid.  But, unfortunately for us,
although this ritual was often depicted, it was the ancient Egyptian equivalent
of a politician donning a hard hat and awkwardly shovelling a bit of ground in
front of a bunch of cameras at a formal breaking ground ceremony.  How the
architects did the actual work to determine the alignment itself before the
ceremony was unfortunately not depicted.

One of the theories as to how the Egyptians aligned the pyramids has it that
they used the circumpolar stars.  The first theory of this kind identifies two
stars in particular for this: Kochab and Mizar.  Kochab is the second brightest
star in Ursa Minor and it's at the end of the little dipper, and Mizar is in
Ursa Major, being the middle star of the handle of the Big Dipper.
Incidentally, Mizar is very close to a slightly fainter star called Alcor and
in the ancient world these two stars were used as a test of your eyesight.  If
you could see both Mizar and Alcor, your vision was considered good, and if
not, it was bad.  In fact, the Japanese took this test a step further and
called Alcor Jumyōboshi, or the "longevity star," because if you couldn't see
it, your eyesight was so bad that you were probably not long for this world.
So, the next time you are out at night and see the Big Dipper, check to see if
you can find Alcor next to Mizar.  Hopefully for your health you can.  And, to
digress yet a little further, it's often the case that two stars that are close
to each other on the sky have nothing whatsoever to do with each other in real
space.  One is much further away than the other, but they just happen to line
up very close together on our sky.  We call these pairs of stars "double
stars," or optical doubles, as opposed to binary stars where the two stars are
actually gravitationally bound to each other.  Well, as it happens, Mizar and
Alcor are in fact a gravitationally bound system.  And what's more, the stars
Mizar and Alcor are themselves not individual stars.  Mizar is a quadruple star
system and Alcor is a binary star system, so the whole thing is actually six
stars that are gravitationally bound together.  So when you find Mizar and
Alcor in the sky, know that you're actually looking at a sextuple star system.

Well, at any rate, Mizar and Kochab were two stars that the Egyptians may have
used to align their Pyramids.  At the time, around the middle of the 3rd
millennium BC, the north celestial pole was quite a ways away from where it is
today due to the precession of the equinoxes.  Today we're rather lucky in that
Polaris is a fairly bright star and also fairly close to the pole, so it makes
for a good guide on the sky.  But at the time that the pyramids were
constructed, the closest star to the north celestial pole was Thuban, the
brightest star in the constellation Draco.  In 2830 BC Thuban actually came
quite close to the north celestial pole, being off by only a tenth of a degree.
But by the time the pyramids were constructed it was more than a degree away,
which means that it couldn't have been directly used as an alignment to true
north since the alignments of the pyramids are better than the alignment of
Thuban itself.  However, at this time, Mizar and Kochab were on opposite sides
of the north celestial pole, and if you drew a line between them, this line
came very close to intersecting the pole.  So the idea is that the architects
would have suspended a plumb bob and then waited until Mizar and Kochab were
vertical with the plumb line.  By finding the direction where the plumb line
covered up both Mizar and Kochab, they would have an alignment to north.  One
of the nice features of this theory is that as the decades progressed, the
precession of the equinoxes would have led to this line between Mizar and
Kochab drifting farther and farther from the celestial pole, so the alignments
of the pyramids would have gotten worse over time, which is what we observe.
And if they had done alignment this in a systematic way, always putting Mizar
on top of Kochab, the alignments would have all been biased in one direction,
which we also observe.  So, the theory has a few nice properties, but it has a
couple of problems, too.  The first is that one of the earliest pyramids, and
the biggest, Khufu's pyramid, is just too precisely aligned.  The pyramid would
have had to have been built about a century later than its accepted date of
construction for its alignment to be explained by these two stars.  Another
theory uses two other stars, Phecda and Megrez, both of which are in Ursa
Major.  These are on the same side of the north celestial pole, but the
principle remains the same and the alignment fits better with the construction
of Khufu's pyramid.  But a more fundamental problem with both of these theories
is that they beg the question of how the Egyptian astronomers determined that
these stars were so closely aligned to the north celestial pole in the first
place.  Somehow they would have had to have some other independent measurement
of true north so that they knew that line between Mizar and Kochab or Phecda
and Megrez was a good measure of true north.  But what method this could have
been is unclear.

There are a couple of other possible techniques to measure north generally rely
on the position of the sun rather than the nighttime stars.  One is fairly
straightforward and uses a gnomon, a fancy word for putting a stick in the
ground.  You watch the shadow the stick casts due the Sun and trace out its
path over the course of the day.  Then you take a measuring tape and you find
pairs of points on opposite sides of the path that are the same distance from
the gnomon.  Then, draw a line connecting these points and find its midpoint.
Finally, you draw a second line from the gnomon to the halfway point and this
is the direction of true north.  This is a pretty basic technique that doesn't
require a lot of fancy equipment to do, but the main problem is once again the
quality of the alignments.  It's hard to do this well enough to get an
alignment that is as good as we see with the pyramids.  Even if you're being
careful, the Sun itself is an extended disc on the sky, so the shadow it casts
is not perfectly sharp.  If you use a pinhole you can overcome this issue and
get a sufficiently precise alignment, but there's no evidence that the
Egyptians used pinholes for their measurements.  Another approach is literally
orthogonal to the other approaches.  Rather than find the direction of north,
you find the direction of east.  All you need for this is to find the location
of sunrise on the equinox.  But once again this just kicks the can down the
road, how do you know the date of the equinox?  We saw in our tour of Greek
astronomy that it wasn't until quite late that the Greek astronomy had
determined the equinox reasonably precisely, and they had to build specialized
equipment like an equatorial ring in order to get it, and we have no evidence
that the Egyptians built anything like that more than 1000 years earlier.  So,
the whole thing around the quality of the alignments of the Egyptian pyramids
remains something of a mystery.  If you can figure it out, well you won't get a
Nobel prize because there's no prize for the history of Egyptian astronomy, but
it would be a pretty cool thing to put on your resume.

Well aside from their remarkable orientations, the Egyptian pyramids have a few
other astronomical connections.  The first is cosmological and has to do with
the fact that they are oriented towards the cardinal directions at all.  Not
only are the pyramids extremely precisely oriented towards the cardinal
directions, they're also all arranged so that each one has an unobstructed view
towards each of the cardinal directions.  In order to make this possible, many
of them were built along a diagonal line that extends southeast and northwest.
For the complex at Giza this is called the Giza diagonal.  Of the cardinal
directions, north and west had a particular significance.  North was the
location of the circumpolar stars, which were associated with immortality since
they never set.  And west was where the Sun set and was the entrance to the
Duat, or the underworld.  So the Pharaoh's soul, or ka, in order to attain a
happy afterlife, needed to travel first to the west, to enter the Duat, and
ultimately to the north, to enter enter the realm of the immortals.

The architects of the pyramids constructed them in such a way as to aid the
pharaoh's ka in this journey.  We can see this most clearly in the largest
pyramid, called Khufu's pyramid.  Khufu's pyramid has three main chambers: the
King's chamber, where the Pharaoh was buried; the Queen's chamber; and the
so-called subterranean chamber.  The purpose of this last chamber is somewhat
unclear.  It's the lowest of the three and it's possible that it may have
originally been intended to be the tomb of the pharaoh, but was abandoned for
this purpose for some reason during construction.  Astronomically, the most
interesting feature was connected to the King's Chamber.  The King's Chamber
has a pair of shafts, one attached to the north wall and the other attached to
the south wall.  These both extend horizontally a short ways, and then have a
bend in them where they start to rise upward at a steep angle, eventually
hitting the edge of the pyramid and exposing the shaft to the outside air.
When the pyramids were first excavated in the 19th century, the consensus among
archaeologists was that these shafts were for ventilation, to bring fresh air
into the King's chamber.  But they don't suit this purpose particularly well.
They are long and really quite narrow, about half a square foot in cross
section, so they don't have the capacity to change much air.

What is rather remarkable about these shafts is that they travel north and
south with extremely high accuracy --- they are about as well aligned as the
entire structure itself and I already spent quite some time harping on how
extraordinary it is that they managed to achieve such precision in that
alignment.  To make matters even more interesting, in the 1960s it was realized
that the northern shaft rises at an angle of 32 degrees and 36', and the
southern shaft rises at an angle of 44 degrees.  This meant that at the time
the pyramid was constructed, the northern shaft would have been aligned with
the star Thuban, then the north star, as it passed across the meridian at its
upper culmination.  And the southern shaft was aligned with the star Alnilam as
it passed through the meridian, Alnilam being the middle star of Orion's belt.
Now, it's important to emphasize that Khufu's pyramid was in no way an
observatory --- no one was actually going to be able to see these stars through
the shaft.  That wasn't the goal, and it wasn't even possible due to the bends
in the shaft.  But these two stars weren't completely random --- they held
special significance in Egyptian cosmology.  Thuban was the closest bright star
to the north celestial pole at the time, and as I just mentioned, the region of
the northern circumpolar stars was associated with eternity and was where the
immortals lived.  Thuban, being the northernmost, then, was especially
important as a representative of the eternal and unchanging.  To the south, the
constellation Orion, of which Alnilam would have marked the center, was
associated with the god Osiris, who was the god of the afterlife.  So the
modern belief is that these shafts in the King's chamber were constructed to
aid the Pharaoh's spirit in journeying toward the appropriate regions of the
Duat in his afterlife.

Now, like any theory of the ancient world, this one has its critics.  The idea
that the shafts were placed there to lead the Pharaoh's ka to the Duat is well
accepted, but the critics maintain that the alignments with any particular
stars just comes down to luck.  After all, there are a lot of stars on the sky
and if you put a shaft at some angle, odds are that it will line up with at
least one of them.  The other counterpoint that the critics add is that there
are also two shafts leading from the Queen's chamber in addition to the two
leading from the King's chamber, but these two from the Queen's chamber don't
have any obvious alignments with any particular stars of note in the way that
the shafts leading from the King's Chamber do.  To make things more
complicated, the shafts leading away from the Queen's Chamber actually don't
extend all the way out to the exterior of the structure, but just stop partway
through in the middle of the pyramid.  It's a little unclear what to make of
this information, whether this was intentional, and if so, what the meaning
behind it was.

Well, while I'm on the subject of the pyramids I should perhaps say a few words
about an idea that has come to be known as the Orion Correlation Theory.  If
you are of a certain generation you may be familiar with this idea, it garnered
some popularity in the media in the 1990s, so if you were watching a lot of TV
around that time you might already be familiar with it.  It holds that the
placement of the three main pyramids of the Giza complex was carefully chosen
to mimic the positions of the stars in Orion's belt.  Now, I mentioned already
that in order to give each pyramid an unobstructed view of the cardinal
directions, the Giza pyramids were placed at a diagonal to each other.  But the
three pyramids don't fall exactly along a straight line, there's a bit of a
bend, and they also aren't equally spaced apart.  In the 1980s an author named
Robert Bauval noticed that the spacings and angles between these three pyramids
matched fairly closely to the three stars of Orion's belt, which also aren't
precisely in a straight line and also aren't exactly the same distance from one
another.  Furthermore, the angle that the stars of Orion's belt make with
respect to north is also very roughly the angle that the Giza diagonal makes
with respect to north.  But, that's about all there is to the idea and there's
a few big problems with it.  The first is that the angle with respect to north
really isn't all that close when you correct for the precession of the
equinoxes.  The pyramids are at 38 degrees whereas Orion's Belt at the time the
pyramids were constructed was at closer to 50 degrees.  Furthermore, if the
pyramids are meant to be a reproduction of the heavens on Earth, there's
another problem which is that you would have to flip it north-south to get the
bend to go in the same direction as it does on the sky.  The final problem is
that there's just not much more you can say about it.  To quote Wolfgang Pauli,
it's an idea that's not even wrong.  There's really no further evidence that
the Egyptians built these particular pyramids with Orion's Belt in mind.  It's
true that Orion had special significance for the Ancient Egyptians, it was the
constellation of Osiris, who was the god of the afterlife, but the ancient
Egyptians had associations with lots of different stars on the sky.  And with
only three points, there's just a very good chance that they will match up with
some set of three stars on the sky.  If you draw three dots on a piece of
paper, odds are that there will be some configuration of three stars that
reasonably closely matches the configuration you drew.  So, although it's an
idea that captured the popular imagination for a time, it has never been taken
seriously by professional Egyptologists.  Perhaps the best thing the idea has
going for it is that it's at least less outlandish than the idea that the
pyramids were built by space aliens.

Well, I think that this is as good a place as any to pause for this month.
Next month I'll try to wrap up our tour of Egyptian astronomy by looking at a
few of the astronomers whose names have survived down to us, along with the
instruments they used for their observations.  I hope you'll join me then.
Until the next full moon, good night and clear skies.

## Additional references

* Belmonte, Astronomy of Ancient Egypt
* Clagett Ancient Egyptian Science Vol. 2
* Magli, Archaeoastronomy
* Kelly, Exploring Ancient Skies
* Ruggles, Handbook of Archaeoastronomy
