---
categories: episode
date: '2023-02-09'
description: As Rome expanded to the East, the cultural influence of the Greeks deepened,
  and this included a strong interest in astrology. Despite resistance from conservative
  Romans, by the Imperial Era, astrology played a critical role in Roman politics,
  both as a tool to support conspirators attempting to assassinate emperors, and wielded
  by emperors as a way to eliminate challenges to their power.
keywords:
- astronomy
- astrology
- history
- rome
layout: episode
number: 26
title: Matters of Life & Death in Roman Astrology
---

## Transcript

Good evening, and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon, or
thereabouts.  My name is Joe Antognini.

We took a bit of a detour in the last episode to look at an astronomical event
or astrological sign that appeared in the obscure corner of Judea in the Roman
Empire around the turn of the millennium.  But in this episode we'll return to
the center of the action in our look at Roman astronomy.  Or really, I should
say Roman astrology, because the Romans cared little for what we would call
astronomy today.

The Romans, as has often been said, were an intensely practical people.  Unlike
those Greeks, who would fritter away their days debating the finer points of
philosophy, the Romans had no interest in knowledge for its own sake.  They
wanted something they could use.  Modeling the motions of the planets through
the heavens was only so much nonsense to them.  But if you could use that to
tell you something interesting, say, when the next emperor would die, or more
prosaically whether or not a boxer you wanted to bet on would win an upcoming
fight, well that was an entirely different story.  The Romans were extremely
interested in that.

That intense interest meant that astrology was a potent political tool, in a
way that is maybe hard for those of us in the modern world to grasp.
Consequently, astrology was highly regulated in ancient Rome and astrologers
often acted as a power behind the throne or were key in aiding conspiracies.

But before diving straight into the influences of astrology on Roman politics,
it's worth backing up a little bit to understand how Rome got to that point in
the first place, because astrology did not always play such a, forgive the pun,
starring role in Roman culture.  The Romans, of course, had always been
superstitious, but in Rome's early days the superstitions were largely
homegrown and consisted of divination by looking for omens in the natural
world, say, the flight of birds, or the entrails of sacrificed animals.

The origins of Roman astrology lay far to the East, ultimately with the
Babylonians.  In the first few episodes of this podcast we saw how the
Babylonians interpreted the motions of the planets through the skies to portend
victories or calamities for kings and nations.  And this astrology was old.
Very old.  It far predated the civilization of the Romans.  So, by the time the
Hellenistic Era rolled around in the late 300s BC, the Babylonian astrologers
had acquired a reputation in Greece for their ancient and mysterious skills.
Indeed, when Alexander the Great was marching on Babylon, the astrologers of
the city met him outside and warned him against entering the city walls.  The
astrologers told him that they had seen an omen in the stars that a king would
die in Babylon.  It was really for his own safety, you see, that he should stay
away.  But that was not all, they had also discovered that Alexander could
avert this danger if he rebuilt a tomb to one of their gods and entered the
city along a particular route.  Now, the ancient accounts suggest that
Alexander probably thought that this was all hokum and just a ruse to keep him
out of their city for a little while longer.  But nevertheless he had heard
enough of their skills that he thought it was probably better to be on the safe
side and he did acquiesce to the astrologers' requests.

The reputation of the Babylonian astrologers seems to have been further
burnished by a few incidents in the wars of the Diodochi after Alexander's
death.  In the aftermath, one of Alexander's officers, Seleucus ended up as the
governor of Babylonia under the general Antigonus Monophthalmus, whom you might
remember from Episode 21 because name meant one-eyed because, well, he had one
eye.  One of Antigonus's officers committed some offense or other in Babylonia
and Seleucus punished the officer without obtaining permission from Antigonus.
Antigonus then demanded tribute from Babylonia which Seleucus refused to pay.
Seeing which way the winds were blowing, Seleucus decided to flee to Egypt, far
from any reprisals from Antigonus.  When Antigonus arrived at Babylon to deal
with Seleucus, he learned that Seleucus had fled.  And what's more, the city's
astrologers then warned him that if Seleucus escaped his grasp, all of Asia
would fall to Seleucus's rule and Seleucus would kill Antigonus to boot.  Now
Antigonus generally did not take diviners seriously, but in the end, Seleucus
did manage to flee to Egypt and in due time killed Antigonus in battle and
founded the Seleucid Empire which ruled much of the east for centuries.  

There was another story involving Seleucus and the astrologers once again about
a decade later.  Seleucus then was founding a new city on the Tigris River,
modestly named Seleucia.  Learning from the lesson of Antigonus that it was
wise to heed the astrologers, he consulted with them to find out the most
propitious time to lay the cornerstone of the city.  For unclear reasons,
Seleucus's relationship with the astrologers had soured by this point and the
astrologers decided to deceive him.  Instead of giving him the time that was
most propitious to lay the cornerstone, they gave him a time that was not
propitious at all.  They then watched as the workers went about laying the
foundations of the city.  But to the amazement of everyone watching, and for
perhaps the only time in history, the workers began working inexplicably
quickly and could not be slowed even when the foremen tried to stop them.
Against their orders, the cornerstone was laid at a different time, which
happened to be precisely the most auspicious of all.  The astrologers were then
called before Seleucus to explain what he had just witnessed.  They managed to
obtain a promise of mercy and then told him of their deception and how the
cornerstone had nevertheless been laid at the most auspicious time.  Evidently
the city was fated to be one of the greatest in history and the fate of the
city could not be changed, even by wily astrologers.

Now, of course, it is unlikely that these two events did in fact occur in
history, but the later historians who told these tales did so to impress on the
reader the prodigious abilities of the Chaldean astrologers and that to ignore
them was to do so at your own peril.

Now, up until the Hellenistic Era, it seems that the Greeks were aware of this
tremendous reputation that the Chaldean astrologers enjoyed.  But there was
little interaction between Greeks to the west and the astrologers themselves.
And this makes sense, the Chaldean astrologers were a valuable source of state
power.  They weren't about to be allowed to just roam to the four corners of
the earth and spill their secrets.  But after Alexander's conquests, these
cultural contacts became far deeper and over the years a stream of Chaldean
astrologers made their way west and shared the methods of Babylonian astrology
with the Greeks.  The first we have record of was Berossus, whom I mentioned
all the way back in Episode 4, who moved to the Greek island of Cos probably
in the early third century.  About a generation later a Chaldean astrologer by
the name of Sudines moved to Pergamum, which by that point was an important
place of scholarship and had a tremendous library, rivaled only by that in
Alexandria.  He seems to have made some contributions to astronomy proper by
producing some astronomical tables and measuring the length of the year.  But
some of his most novel contributions were in writing about the astrological
properties of gemstones.

During the Hellenistic era, many of these Chaldean astrologers didn't only
travel to Greek areas but went to Egypt as well, and from there these ideas
transferred from Egypt to Greece thanks to the close cultural connection of
those two lands.  Throughout our long tour of Greek astronomy every Tom, Dick,
and Harry I told you about had at some point in their youth traveled to Egypt
and learned the secrets of astronomy and geometry from the priests there.  So,
much of the influence of Babylonian astrology was mediated through the
Egyptians.  In fact, over the 20th century there was quite a lot of debate as
to whether or not Egyptian or Babylonian astrology came first and which one
influenced the other.  These days the debate seems to be fairly settled on the
precedence of Babylonian astrology.  But the ties between the two were quite
strong, and in turn, both of them strongly influenced Greek astrology.

Well, the Greeks had about one and a half centuries for the astrological ideas
of the Babylonians to percolate in their culture.  But during the 2nd century
the Romans swept in and what had once been a collection of independent kingdoms
and city-states became subsumed into the rapidly growing Roman Republic.  So
it's about in the middle of the 2nd century BC that we start seeing Greek
philosophers in turn traveling west and spreading their ideas in Rome.  In
particular, if we could point to one moment where the Romans began to be
interested in Greek thought, it was the year 155 BC.  Without getting too deep
into the backstory, Athens, which was then under Roman rule, had attacked the
town of Oropus and as punishment, Rome had levied a fine on Athens of 500
talents, a prodigious sum of money.  In an attempt to wriggle out of the fine,
Athens sent three philosophers to Rome as ambassadors to try to negotiate the
fine lower.  These were Carneades of Cyrene, Diogenes the Babylonian, and
Critolaus.  Their reputations seem to have preceded them and they were met with
good humor by the Romans.  There is a story that Aulus Albinus, a Roman praetor
at the time, was speaking with Carneades and Diogenes, Carneades being a member
of the Skeptical School and Diogenes being a Stoic.  Albinus said to Carneades,
"In your view, Carneades, I am not a real praetor, nor is this a real city."
Carneades responded, "In the opinion of our Stoic friend here, *you* are not
real."  With time to kill in Rome, the three philosophers began doing what they
did best --- teaching philosophy.  Carneades, in particular, seems to have had
an oratorical flair and one day went out into the streets and expounded a
passionate and eloquent lecture on the value of Roman justice.  But the next
day, now having attracted an even larger crowd, he expounded an equally
passionate and eloquent lecture which rebutted each of the arguments he had
made the previous day.  Then to his stunned audience he made the argument that
justice itself was not a well defined concept.

Well, out in the crowd was a senator named Cato the Elder, and he recognized
how subversive these arguments were.  Cato persuaded the Senate to expel
Carneades back to Athens where he couldn't corrupt the minds of the Roman
youth.  But Carneades was just one of many Greek philosophers who spread their
ideas in Rome at the time.  A few years earlier, the philosopher Crates of
Mallus also spent some time in Rome as an ambassador, though the sources
conflict as to which city he was representing.  Unfortunately for Crates during
his stay in Rome he fell into an open sewer and broke his leg, so he ended up
staying in Rome quite a while longer than he originally intended.  But while he
was laid up in bed, he made productive use of his time corrupting the minds of
the Roman youth by teaching them philosophy.

Now, the Greek philosophers that came over to Rome in the middle of the second
century were actually pretty skeptical about astrology on the whole.  Carneades
in particular had voiced the most strenuous arguments against the discipline
that was starting to gain popularity in Rome at the time.  Carneades levied
five main arguments against astrology, though these arguments were by no means
unique to him.

To start off, Carneades argued that even if there was some merit to astrology,
it would be of no use to us, because in general no one could measure the
positions of the planets in the sky precisely enough at the exact time of an
individual's birth.  So as a practical matter astrology as a tool for
determining the fate of an individual was dead on arrival.  But Carneades went
further and added a few more arguments against the validity of astrology.  His
next argument was that anyone can see that people are influenced by their
environment.  People born in Athens exhibit one set of customs, and people born
in Egypt exhibit another, even though the people in Athens were born at all
different times.  Furthermore, if the stars were truly influencing events here
on Earth, why would their effects be limited to humans?  After all, the Sun's
influence is borne by everything on Earth.  It affects planets and animals just
as much as humans.  So should it not be the case that an astrological omen in
the heavens should apply equally well to an animal as to a man?  If the stars
display the sign of the birth of a great leader, would that mean that a dog
born that day is destined to be the leader of all dogs?  But probably the
strongest argument against astrology levied not only by Carneades, but many
skeptics of astrology of the time, was the argument of twins.  Twins are born
under exactly the same stars.  Yet they very frequently have radically
different lives.  One lives long, the other dies young.  One acquires great
wealth, the other falls into poverty.  If the stars are responsible for setting
their destinies, how can you explain even a single case where one twin meets a
different destiny than their counterpart?

Another argument against the merits of astrology of the time, not due to Carneades
specifically, was that the premise of the associations didn't make any sense to
begin with.  For example, someone born under the sign of Leo, the Lion, is
assumed to have the qualities of a lion --- strength and courage.  But you
wouldn't expect that someone literally born next to a real, physical lion would
have those qualities.  So why should being born under its astrological sign
bear those qualities?

In the end though, these kinds of philosophical arguments were no match for the
waves of astrologers who made their way west to Rome during the 2nd century BC.
During this century, Romans of the upper classes became more and more taken by
Greek culture, and that included an interest in astrology.  Now, as in any
society, these kinds of social trends never include everybody.  Cato the Elder
was famously opposed to the influence of Greek culture in Rome.  Cato was of
the opinion that astrology was a permissible if perhaps distasteful belief for
plebeians or slaves, but was certainly not acceptable for patricians.  And more
generally, Cato was of the old Roman school of thought that an excessive
interest in philosophy was not appropriate for the Roman aristocrat who
should be concerned with practical matters of politics and war.  But ultimately
Cato ended up being yet another man standing athwart history yelling stop.

Now, I've already mentioned the influence of the groups of Greek philosophers
who traveled to Rome on official duties.  But probably even more important for
the general percolation of Greek culture in Rome was a less voluntary
migration.  As Rome conquered Greek lands, a stream of slaves made their way
west.  Educated Greek slaves would frequently end up in the employ of
aristocratic Romans to tutor their children.  As the older generations gave
way to the next generations who had been raised on Greek scholarship, it is no
surprise that by the end of the 2nd century, Roman culture began to look more
Greek.  One of the symbolic turning points, at least that later authors
claimed, was due to the influence of the great Roman general Scipio Africanus.
Scipio was a huge enthusiast of Greek culture and in an attempt to emulate
Alexander the Great, he took the radical step of shaving his beard.  After
Scipio defeated Carthage in the Second Punic War, his popularity in Rome was
such that everyone in town wanted to look like him and the clean shaven look
became de rigueur among aristocratic Romans.  Which, in the end is a bit ironic
since the Greeks themselves did not shave their beards and regarded doing so as
being rather effeminate.  Now I should mention that this explanation of the
Roman fashion for shaving is disputed by modern historians.  Some argue that
the clean shaven look had been popular in Rome long before Scipio Africanus.
But it is nevertheless indicative of the influence of Greek culture that Roman
authors pointed to the influence of the Greeks as being the cause for the
rather unusual practice in the ancient world of regular shaving that Roman men
engaged in.

Now of course, Greek culture was multifaceted, and as we've seen over the many
episodes on Greek astronomy, there was a wide variety of philosophical schools.
We met Carneades who was a Skeptic, which was one of the newer schools, but
many of the older ones were still kicking around, the Peripatetic School of
Aristotle, the Platonists, the Pythagoreans, the Epicureans.  But the one
school that found the most popularity in Rome was Stoicism.  Now to try to keep
myself on track and not drift too far away from Roman astrology, I won't go too
deep into the history and tenets of Stoicism.  But unlike most of the other
Greek philosophical schools, which tended to obsess over the finer points of
epistemology or ontology, Stoicism was more oriented towards shaping the mind
so as to be best equipped to handle the vicissitudes of life.  Central to
Stoicism was the idea that although you could not control external events in
the world, you could control your interior mind --- you could control how those
external events affected you.  And with proper control of oneself, you could
always live a good life no matter what life threw at you.  For the
practical-minded Romans, this was a philosophy they could get behind.

The popularity of Stoicism in Rome seems to have complemented the rise in the
popularity of astrology over the second century.  Of all the Greek
philosophical schools, Stoicism was the most amenable to astrology.  Most of
the others were highly skeptical in their temperament --- and here I'm using
the word skeptical in the modern sense, not referring to the literal Skeptical
School.  They were often interested in demonstrating what we did not know as
much as what we did.  But the Stoics were less keen in playing games like that.
Now, it's certainly the case that several of the prominent Stoic philosophers
that we've already met, like Diogenes the Babylonian and Crates of Mallus, were
skeptical of astrology.  But go back to the founder of the Stoic school, Zeno
of Citium --- not to be confused with the Zeno of Zeno's Paradoxes that we met
back in Episode 12.  This later Zeno was sympathetic to the ideas of astrology.
And the basic premise of astrology is that one's fate in life is ordained by
the star's.  This meshes well with the Stoic outlook that one has little
control of what the world throws at you.  All you can control is how you react
to it.  The idea of Fate played an important role in the mindset of many
Stoics.  A famous motto of the Stoics was "Ducunt volentem fata, nolentem
trahunt," which means "Fate guides the willing, and drags along him who
resists."  So while astrology was not always favored by the leaders of the
Stoic school, among its rank and file adherents astrology just grew more and
more popular over time.

By the late Roman Republic astrology pervaded culture.  We saw in the last
episode how coins in the Roman Empire frequently bore astrological symbols.
Buildings bore astrological symbols as well.  Astrological references showed up
frequently in Roman literature and drama.  A famous character of the writer
Petronius named Trimalchio is a former slave who becomes a wealthy merchant and
whose ostentatious behavior is meant to lampoon the nouveau riche in Rome.
Among Trimalchio's many excesses is a twelve-course feast in which every dish
corresponds to a sign of the zodiac.  Plautus's play Rudens opens with a
monologue by the star Arcturus.

Now an enthusiasm for astrology was not limited to the upper class.  The
plebeians also had a great deal of faith in astrology.  In addition to the
prominent philosophers who made their way west around the 2nd century, there
were undoubtedly legions of obscure astrologers who travelled from town to town
and tried to make a modest living reading the stars for the commoners.  Some of
the texts we have show just how specific astrology had become to help answer
the average Roman's most pressing questions.  Of course we're all familiar with
the 12 signs of the zodiac, each one spanning 30 degrees across the ecliptic.
But each sign was in turn divided into 3 sections that were 10 degrees across.
And these, in turn, were divided even further.  Each of these regions, called
decani, were associated with particular questions, and the list of these
questions is indicative of the kinds of things that the common people wanted to
know.  Should I get married this year?  Will my baby be a boy or a girl?  Is
the woman I want to marry a virgin or not?  Will I be rich or poor?  Was the
dream I had last night a good omen or a bad omen?  Will I live a long time?
Will a sick relative recover or die?  Will I win my lawsuit at court?  Roman
satirists mocked these common astrologers who on the one hand claimed vast
powers at divining the future from the heavens, and on the other hand charged
the equivalent of a few bucks for their services.  

Now it's worth at this point drawing a distinction between two kinds of
astrology: fatalistic astrology and catarchic astrology.  Fatalistic astrology
holds that the stars unalterably determine fate on Earth.  Catarchic astrology
is more wishy washy and simply holds that the stars influence events on Earth,
but they do not inescapably determine them.  In Rome, and generally throughout
history, the ideas of fatalistic astrology have only really been popular among
a small group of intellectuals.  At root, it's a fairly pessimistic kind of
theory since it completely rules out the possibility of free will.  As much as
you might try to avoid your destiny, there is no escaping it.  And many of the
famous Greek tragedies like Oedipus play on these ideas, where in the very
attempt to avoid one's prophesied fate, one brings it about.  More humorously,
the writer Lukillios poked fun at fatalistic astrologers by writing about an
astrologer named Aulus who predicted the time of his own death.  When the day
came and he hadn't died, the astrologer grew very sad and hung himself.  Of
course, with that said, fatalistic astrology is in some ways right at home in
modern science.  At least as we understand the laws of physics today, all
matter behaves deterministically, there is no room for free will.  The fate of
the universe is precisely determined by the laws of physics.

But these kinds of ideas have always only appealed to a limited number of
people, either weirdos who like the idea of the impossibility of free will, or
people who are at least resigned to the logic of it.  But among most everyone
else it's an uncomfortable idea.  One of the questions that Greek and Roman
writers wrestled with was how you could possibly account for concepts like
virtue and justice in a world ruled by fatalistic astrology.  After all, if
there is no free will and the stars determine everything you do, it seems as
though someone who murders his own mother cannot be held responsible.  The
stars made him do it.  And there's no reason to praise a great soldier.  He had
no say in his glorious deeds, it was all predetermined by the stars.  So the
alternative of catarchic astrology which left some room for free will, was
always far more popular.  The idea was that the stars weren't inescapably
determining your fate, they were just thumbing the scales, so to speak.  And
that meant that if you knew how they worked --- which side of the scale they
were going to thumb and when, you just might be able to use that to your
advantage.  And everyone likes the idea of getting whatever advantage they can
in life.

Now so far the astrology in Rome I have been telling you about seems pretty
tame.  People wondering about the gender of their baby, whether or not their
spouse was having an affair, whom they should bet on in the chariot races, and
so forth.  Important to them, for sure, but not really of much interest to
anyone else.  So it's easy to fall into the trap of thinking that that was all
there was to the astrology of the day, because that's more or less how
astrology works today.  Some people, actually quite a lot of people, use it
today to understand their personal relationships, but that's about the extent
of it.  But faith in astrology was far deeper in ancient Rome and that led to
it being an incredibly potent political tool, to an extent that is hard to
fathom today.  But if you put yourself in the mindset of a true believer, if
there is a revolt or a conspiracy of some sort and the astrologers say that its
success is inevitable, written in the stars, or that it is doomed to fail,
well, you're going to want to be on the right side of history.  Among the
plebeians, astrology played a crucial role in one of the major slave rebellions,
and a more minor role in another.  In the first slave rebellion, called the
First Servile War of 135--132 BC, the leader of the rebellion was a man in
Sicily named Eunus, who claimed to have prophetic powers.  Now, Eunus was a
general kind of wonder worker rather than an astrologer specifically.  It seems
that he wove in astrological omens into his prophecies, but his main claim to
leadership was that he was able to talk to the Gods.  He awed crowds by
breathing fire as he spoke.  A Roman author named Florus explained this as
being a magic trick where he took a nutshell, poked a number of holes in it,
and placed a burning ember inside.  The nutshell kept it from burning his mouth
and when he blew out, sparks would come out of his mouth.

But astrology played a more prominent role in the Second Servile War which
occurred about 30 years later from 104 to 100 BC, also in Sicily.  This time,
one of the leaders of the rebellion, a man named Athenion, was first and
foremost an astrologer.  Now Athenion was wise enough to know that it actually
wasn't the smartest idea to be the public face of the rebellion.  So he was
more than willing to let a more ambitious slave named Salvius Tryphon play that
role.  But Athenion played his part by convincing his fellow slaves to join in
in the rebellion by telling them that the stars were absolutely unambiguous
that the success of the rebellion was inevitable.  All they had to do was rise
from their chains and they would obtain freedom and glory.  So in this event
you can start to see the power of astrology in the ancient world.  If you were
a slave going up against the might of the Roman Army, you wanted a higher power
on your side, and what higher power could there be than inexorable destiny
traced out by the stars in the sky?

Astrology as a tool to control the unwashed masses also came up a few times in
the Roman Army itself.  In June 168 BC there was a lunar eclipse on the eve of
a battle between the Romans and the Macedonians, the Battle of Pydna.
Traditionally, when the Roman soldiers saw a lunar eclipse, they would be
terrified and would bang their pots and pans and raise torches to the sky in an
effort to bring back the light of the Moon.  But in this case because the
eclipse happened the night before a battle the commander, a general named
Lucius Aemilius Paulus wanted to take no chances of the troops getting spooked
by the event.  So that evening, before the eclipse was to occur, he gathered
his troops and explained to them what was going to happen.  The Moon would go
dark for several hours and that this was simply due to the fact that the Sun
was on the opposite side of the Earth as the Moon and the Moon therefore fell
into the shadow of the Earth.  This was just something that happened from time
to time and was nothing to fear.  Meanwhile in the Macedonian camp, the equally
superstitious troops got no such forewarning from their leaders.  When they saw
the Moon disappear that night they assumed that it portended the death of their
king and became terrified, and ultimately lost the battle the next day.
Nevertheless, although Aemilius Paulus clearly understood the mechanistic
explanation of the lunar eclipse, he must have believed at some level that
three was something more going on because after the light of the Moon returned,
he sacrificed 11 cows in thanksgiving.  After all, it couldn't hurt, just in
case the philosophers were wrong.

Again, Roman leaders were a pragmatic people.  They weren't interested in
obtaining the truth and enlightening the masses to shape them into well rounded
and self-actualized individuals, they were interested in getting things done.
Astrology was a tool of social control.  When it wasn't in their interest that
the troops know the cause of a lunar eclipse, the troops didn't know.  We see
this about two centuries later, during the reign of Emperor Tiberius, when
there was a mutiny in the legions in Pannonia.  Tiberius sent his only son,
Drusus to calm things down, which should give you an indication of how bad
things had gotten out in the Roman camps.  But one night as things started to
get out of hand, there was a lunar eclipse.  Now, Drusus could have followed
the example of Lucius Aemilius Paulus and rationalistically explained to the
troops that this was just periodic phenomenon that occurred when the Moon falls
into the Earth's shadow.  But instead Drusus preferred to take a different
tack, and after the eclipse occurred, explained that this was a sign that the
gods had been horrified by their crimes.  Stunned by what they had witnessed,
the mutiny quickly dissipated.

Now, astrology seems to have taken hold among the plebeians not too long after
cultural ties with the east deepened in the 2nd century BC.  Among the
aristocrats it took somewhat longer for it to be viewed as something that they
themselves deeply believed.  The first aristocrat we could perhaps call a true
believer was Gnaeus Octavius who was consul in 87 BC.  This was around the time
of a civil war called the Social War during which the generals Cinna and Marius
marched on Rome.  Octavius had the opportunity to flee the city as the generals
laid siege, but his astrologer advised him that he would survive if he remained
where he was.  So Octavius stayed, but when the generals took the city he was
executed.  Another player in this conflict, the general Sulla, also took
astrology seriously.  Although he was generally skeptical of divination, he
appears to have encountered some astrologers in his campaign against
Mithridates in the East.  He came home with his horoscope which predicted,
among other things, the date of his own death.  Towards the end of his life,
Sulla used this date to decide when to write his memoirs.  Not too early so
that he wouldn't have to leave out the last part of his life, but also not too
late so that he wouldn't have time to finish it.

About a generation later a Roman senator by the name of Nigidius Figulus became
well known for the breadth of his astrological knowledge, along with other
mysticism and esotericism, chiefly of the Pythagorean variety.  Nigidius had
something of a middling political career.  In the chaos of Caesar's seizure of
power, Nigidius ended up in exile and died before Caesar could extend him a
pardon.  But he was one of the great Roman politician scholars of the late
Republic.  He is less well known to us today than his contemporary Cicero, but
that's probably mostly due to the obscure subject matter he wrote about rather
than the quality of his scholarship.  Nevertheless, we have him to thank for
our knowledge of the Babylonian and Egyptian constellations.  One of the works
he wrote was on what he called the two spheres: the Greek sphere and the
barbarian sphere.  The Greek sphere was the usual set Greek constellations that
more or less map on to our modern day constellations.  The barbarian spheres
were then the constellations according to the barbarians, and here Nigidius had
in mind the Babylonians and the Egyptians.  Well one story about Nigidius's
astrological skill comes down to us.  It's said that one day in 63 BC the
Senate was meeting, September 23 to be precise.  The Senate was conducting its
business as normal when after a while a senator named Gaius Octavius rushed
into the chamber.  He apologized to his colleagues for his tardiness and gave
the excuse that a son of his had been born that morning.  Immediately Nigidius
recognized the significance of the time of the child's birth and stood up and
proclaimed that this child would become the master of the world.  And indeed
the child would grow up to be none other than the emperor Augustus.  As good a
story as it is, it's almost certainly apocryphal since as I mentioned two
episodes ago, the Roman calendar was identical every year and the Senate did
not meet on September 23.

Now, ever since the second century astrology had been rising in popularity,
quickly among the masses and somewhat more slowly among the patricians.  But if
we are to identify a single point in time in which astrology became officially
embedded in the Roman state and psyche, it was after the death of Julius Caesar
in 44 BC.  Now Caesar himself was generally skeptical of astrology and would
routinely ignore the advice of astrologers.  He was warned by the astrologer
Spurinna, for instance, that if he and his armies crossed into Africa in 46 BC
before the winter solstice, he would be met with disaster.  Caesar ignored him,
crossed into Africa anyway and had a very successful campaign.  But people tend
to forget that little hiccup of Spurinna's.  Instead they tend to remember a
more successful prophecy of his that Caesar would die by the Ides of March in
44 AD.  When the Ides of March had come and Caesar was still alive, no worse
for wear, he was walking to the Senate and saw Spurinna and said, "Well, the
Ides of March have come." Spurinna replied, "Yes, but they have not gone."
Caesar, of course, was assassinated in the Senate shortly thereafter.

Without getting too deep into the politics of the time, the conspirators who
had plotted Caesar's assassination seem to have badly misjudged popular opinion
about the dictator.  They were expecting to be greeted with praise for having
rid the people of this tyrant.  But Caesar was fairly popular among the people
and his death only served to augment his popularity.  But what really seems to
have cemented Caesar's reputation in the eyes of the people as one of the
greatest Romans was that four months later, during his funeral games in late
July, a comet appeared in the sky.  By all accounts this comet was tremendously
bright, bright enough to be seen during the day, which makes it one of the
brightest comets on record.

Now as I mentioned last episode, comets in antiquity were almost universally
seen to be harbingers of doom.  But Caesar's comet seems to have been an
exception, at least in Rome.  The Romans interpreted the comet as bearing the
soul of Caesar into the sky, and this interpretation was encouraged by Caesar's
adopted nephew and heir Augustus.  Augustus used the arrival of Caesar's comet
as the launchpad for his political career, playing up the idea that Caesar's
rise had been destined by the heavens, which, with him as Caesar's heir, by
implication meant that he was destined by the heavens for great things as well.
From this idea that Caesar was placed among the stars, catasterized, to use the
technical term, courtiers of the time began referring to the emperor and
members of the imperial family as "stars," and this seems to be the origin of
the usage of "star" that we have today for someone who is notable in a field
like a movie star or a rock star.

Now although Augustus tried to portray his rise as inevitable, commanded by the
stars, it was in reality anything but, of course.  Augustus's principal
conflict was with the general Mark Antony.  In the years after Caesar's
assassination, Mark Antony ended up with control of the Roman East and set up
shop in Alexandria.  Over the years respectable Romans at home began to gossip,
first in whispers and later more loudly that Mark Antony had gone native.  He
had abandoned his Roman culture and succumbed to the decadent ways of the East.
Now there's two sides to every tale and Mark Antony's adoption of local customs
probably factored into his popularity in the East.  But Augustus knew that if
he wanted sole control over all of Rome he had to do something about Mark
Antony.  To shore up his popularity at home, Augustus pacified the people by
throwing lavish games, handing out free food, paying for free haircuts and
shaves, making the baths free.  That was the carrot.  One of the sticks he
employed was to rid Rome of any subversive elements.  And the astrologers of
Rome had largely come from the East and so were generally on Mark Antony's
side.  So in 33 BC Augustus had all astrologers expelled from Italy.  Now this
wasn't actually the first time that astrologers had been expelled from Rome.  I
neglected to mention earlier that in 139 BC, about a century earlier, the Roman
Senate voted to expel astrologers from Italy as well.  The reason the Senate
gave at the time was that "through their lies by means of fallacious
interpretation of the stars they were fomenting in instable and shallow minds
an ardor from which they themselves profited financially."  But the subtext of
this earlier expulsion was that conservative elements in the Roman Senate were
by this point getting worried about the growing influence of Greek culture on
Roman society, which at this time had been going on for about a decade.
Astrologers weren't the only one's affected by this decree, philosophers among
others were expelled, too.  They had 10 days to pack up their bags and leave.

These kinds of expulsions were always temporary.  In the first expulsion of 139
BC the prohibition expired after a year.  And Augustus could ease up once he
had eliminated the threat of Mark Antony.  Later in his life, though, Augustus
imposed an edict which would have a profound effect on Roman astrology and
politics.  In 11 AD Augustus issued a set of regulations on the practice of
astrology.  These were not limited to Rome or Italy itself, but applied to the
entire empire.  The most important pieces were first that astrologers had to
conduct sessions with two clients at a time --- they could not meet one on one
with someone.  And second, they were forbidden from predicting the date of
anyone's death.  Now, these two rules might seem a bit anodyne at first glance.
But they were a big deal in practice.  These regulations were the basis for
dozens and dozens of trials, convictions, exiles, and executions that we have
records for, some of which were very high profile.  And undoubtedly there were
hundreds or thousands of lower profile convictions that we do not have records
for.

At one level, these rules were about maintaining social order.  A son who
learned from an astrologer that his father was soon to die might want to help
the process along so that he could receive his inheritance sooner.  Suppose the
predicted day came and the father was still puttering around --- his son might
take things into his own hands to make the prophecy work out.  Or, even if he
didn't go to quite those extremes, it's easy to see how it might lead to other
problems.  Perhaps he'd just start taking things a little early.  After all, if
the father was going to die in a few months anyway, what's the harm?  Or a
husband who learned that his wife was going to die shortly might want to start
looking for a new woman to replace her sooner rather than later.  The other
requirement, that any astrological consultations have two people present,
excluding the astrologer, was a kind of enforcement mechanism.  Now you'd have
another person who could potentially snitch on you and this would act as a
incentive to keep your conversation with the astrologer on the up-and-up.  But
from Augustus's perspective, any improvement to the social order from these
regulations was probably just a nice bonus.  What he was really interested in
was making sure that no one predicted the date of *his* death.  Trying to
determine the date of the Emperor's death was not just any old crime.  Since
the Emperor effectively was the state, trying to determine when he would die
was treason.

And it's easy to see why.  The Emperor needed to ensure that his authority was
absolutely unquestioned.  We're all familiar with the idea of a lame duck in
American politics, in the months after an election when a new president or
Congress has been voted in.  Officially the old president or party is still in
charge.  But in practice it's hard for them to get all that much done because
everyone knows they'll be gone in a few weeks time anyway.  So in Rome, if
everyone started to believe that the Emperor would die within a few weeks,
well, why would anyone listen to him?  Now you might say, what's the big deal
here?  Just wait a few months and when the Emperor is still fit as a fiddle
everyone would realize the prognostications were wrong and move on.  No harm no
foul.  But the main issue is that these kinds of predictions had a way of
turning into self-fulfilling prophecies.  Roman emperors ruled by fear as much
as anything else.  No one wanted to be caught appearing to be disloyal.  That
was how you found yourself dead in a hurry.  Nearly every Roman administration
was beset by conspirators who attempted to assassinate the emperor and seize
power for themselves.  Many of these conspiracies were buffoonish, but they
were successful often enough to make them a real concern for every emperor.
Augustus must have frequently thought of the fate of his adopted uncle Julius
Caesar and how he could avoid dying in the same way.  So conspiracies were
dealt with ruthlessly.  This posed a kind of prisoner's dilemma for the
conspirators.  A successful conspiracy needed quite a few people involved in
order to gain access to the Emperor in a way that could cause him harm.  If
they all kept their mouths shut they could possibly succeed and end up with
greater power in the new regime.  But if one of them defected and spilled the
beans to the Emperor, that one could be assured high honors for having saved
the Emperor's life.  The rest would be dead.  So you can see how an
astrological horoscope that predicted that the Emperor would die shortly would
be incredibly valuable to a nascent conspiracy.  If you learned of a brewing
conspiracy and you also know that the Emperor is soon going to die, it would be
a really bad idea to defect.  After all, the horoscope is basically telling you
as clear as can be that the conspiracy will be successful.  Being seen to
betray the conspirators is going to look really bad when *they* end up in
charge.

So these kinds of astrological predictions were of tremendous political
importance in the Roman Empire.  From Augustus onward, every Roman emperor to a
man was a firm believer in astrology, at least up until sometime after
Constantine when the emperors were largely Christian.

Now when Augustus issued this edict he had to be very careful that this itself
didn't pose a danger to himself.  After all, if there are rumors flying around
that the emperor is going to die soon, and then the Emperor issues a decree
forbidding predictions of the date of the Emperor's death, well, that looks a
little convenient doesn't it?  So simultaneously, Augustus also released his
own horoscope, which included his own predicted death date.  And good news for
him, this date happened to be well into the future.

Now it should also be said that one of the perhaps unintended consequences of
the various restrictions that the Roman government imposed on astrology over
the years was that it legitimized it in the eyes of the public.  After all, why
would the government be getting so worked up about what the astrologers had to
say unless there really was something to it?  The more that astrologers were
persecuted, the more popular and influential they became.  One Roman author
wrote that they were "a class which will always be proscribed in this country,
and yet always retained."

The earliest prosecution under the edict of 11 AD that we have record of was 5
years later of Scribionus Libo Drusus in the year 16 AD.  By this point
Augustus had died and the new Emperor Tiberius had been in power for two years
or so.  Tiberius was seemingly still a little bit insecure in his hold on power
so at least in some accounts he manufactured a conspiracy in order to expose it
and punish it, in order to make anyone else think twice.  Tiberius chose
Scribionus Libo Drusus as the target.  Libo Drusus in these tellings was not a
serious threat to the emperor.  He wasn't even really a serious man at all.  He
was a young man who was apparently something of a cad and was loose with his
money.  Libo Drusus at some point went to an astrologer to learn if he would be
rich and he learned that indeed he would be rich enough to pave the Via Appia
road with money as far south as Brindisi.  Now, strictly speaking, Libo Drusus
wasn't breaking any rules here.  True, if he really did become that wealthy, it
did seem to imply he had to become Emperor because who else could be that
wealthy?  But the prohibition from the 11 AD edict was only against predicting
the emperor's death, which it doesn't seem that he did.  So Tiberius in order
to prosecute Libo Drusus, he had to bend the rules somewhat.  First, in order
to get secure testimony about Libo Drusus's treason, he had his slaves tortured
to extract confessions that he wanted to hear.  But even this was not enough
because in Roman law, a slave could not testify against his master.  So
Tiberius forced the sale of the slaves to the state, whereupon their testimony
became valid evidence since they were no longer his slaves.  Furthermore,
Tiberius prohibited the practice of astrology throughout Italy.  Any Roman
citizens caught practicing astrology would have their property confiscated and
any foreign astrologers would be executed.  At any rate, poor Libo Drusus
saw the writing on the wall and before his trial committed suicide.  His
property was confiscated by several senators who were allies of Tiberius, and
from that point forward, no member of his family was permitted to take the name
Drusus and the day of his death was declared a public holiday.  This story
comes to us largely through Tacitus and at least in his telling, Libo Drusus
was no kind of threat to Tiberius.  But we do also have to leave open the
possibility that Tacitus was biased and left out key elements of the story and
that perhaps Libo Drusus was organizing a more serious conspiracy than we know.

But one thing that is certainly representative of this story for astrological
prosecutions in the Roman Empire in general is that you'll notice that the
focus of the prosecution was on a Roman aristocrat.  The astrologer himself who
counseled Libo Drusus did not play much of a role in the trial.  Today if
someone is caught buying drugs, we usually expect the drug dealer to receive a
much harsher sentence than the buyer.  But in Rome the dealers of astrology so
to speak tended not to be prosecuted as harshly as the buyers.  Clients of
astrologers were frequently executed.  But astrologers themselves would
generally be exiled or sentenced to a period of hard labor in the mines.  Death
sentences were typically only imposed on astrologers who openly predicted the
date of an emperor's death.  The focus on the clients of astrologers rather
than the astrologers themselves made sense in the Roman context though.  The
Roman emperors weren't actually trying to stamp out astrology altogether.  They
knew that was impossible.  They just wanted to prevent any challenges to their
power.  And the astrologers themselves were nobodies.  They weren't a threat to
the throne.  But their aristocratic clients were.  They were the real danger,
so they were the focus of prosecutions and the recipients of the harshest
punishments.

Now it's perhaps ironic that one of Tiberius's first acts was to prohibit the
practice of astrology in Italy because Tiberius was not only a true believer in
astrology, one of his closest advisors was an astrologer and he was an
experienced practitioner of astrology as well.  To understand how Tiberius's
relationship with astrology developed, it's worth backing up a little bit to
the time before Tiberius took power.  He had been a promising youth born into a
notable family and as he came of age he was granted the position of quaestor.
At the age of 21 he became an officer in the legions that went east to fight
against the Parthian Empire and he conducted himself well.  Not long after he
married a noblewoman named Vispania and by all accounts the two were deeply in
love with each other.  But things started to go off the rails for Tiberius a
few years later.  The emperor Augustus liked what he saw in Tiberius and wanted
to forge a closer tie to him.  So Augustus requested that Tiberius divorce his
wife and marry Augustus's own daughter, Julia.  Now calling something like this
a "request" is maybe downplaying it a little bit.  What would be the
consequences of refusing the Emperor this request?  Best not to think of it.
So Tiberius complied.  But Julia was not a great match for him.  Julia had
reputation for debauchery and licentiousness, and at least according to the
rumors would go down to the Forum every night to drink and sleep with a new
man.

After five years of this public humiliation that Julia caused him, Tiberius
could take it no more and announced that he was retiring from public life and
moved to Rhodes.  At least that's one version of the story, that Tiberius was
motivated to move to Rhodes in order to escape the stain of his second wife on
his reputation.  But other motivations have also been proposed.  He might have
seen himself as being a back-up to take the throne if Augustus died, but once
Augustus's grandsons Gaius and Lucius came of age, they were the heirs to the
throne and Tiberius wasn't really relevant to the line of succession anymore.
At any rate, what we do know is that in 6 BC, Tiberius gave up all the power he
had acquired and moved to Rhodes, which, at that time was the center of Greek
scholarship.  In Rhodes Tiberius was very interested in spending his time
learning philosophy from the masters.  But he had a hard time fitting in in his
new environment.  Satirists in Rhodes mocked him as being an exile and the
philosophers didn't really want him around.  And anyway he had no power
anymore, so what was he going to do about it?  One of the most prominent
philosophers in Rhodes, Diogenes, went so far as to forbid Tiberius from
attending his lectures.

It was here in Rhodes, rejected by everybody, all alone in the world, that
Tiberius fell in with an astrologer named Thrasyllus.  One apocryphal story has
it that Tiberius consulted numerous astrologers to learn about his future and
killed each one afterwards in order to keep the secrets of his future safe.
But when he encountered Thrasyllus, Thrasyllus told him that he had seen in the
stars that his own life was in mortal danger.  Tiberius was so impressed by
Thrasyllus's skills that he kept the astrologer alive and had had him teach him
everything he knew.  Well, however the two came across each other, unlike
everyone else in Rhodes, Thrasyllus was more than happy to spend time with
Tiberius and teach him astrology, and by all accounts the two became close
friends.  We don't know much about the early life of Thrasyllus or even where
he came from.  He may have been of Egyptian extraction but that is not much
more than speculation.  At any rate, the two spent a great deal of time
together for about a decade in Rhodes.  But then, catastrophe struck Augustus.
In 2 AD one of his grandsons, an heir to the throne, died of an illness and
then in 4 AD his other grandson died, probably from an infected wound, leaving
Augustus with no heirs.  All of a sudden, Augustus's carefully lain succession
plans were shattered.  Tiberius was once more the only man Augustus could turn
to to take over the empire after his death.  So shortly thereafter Augustus
summoned Tiberius to return to Rome and reenter public life.  Before he had
heard any of this, Tiberius claimed to have seen in the stars that a ship that
would bring him good fortune would soon arrive.

Well, regardless of the merits of that particular story, what is known is that
when Tiberius returned to Rome, he brought Thrasyllus with him and Thrasyllus
jumped headfirst into the cutthroat politics of Rome.  Now, Augustus was old
when he recalled Tiberius back to Rome, but he was by no means out of power.
But Thrasyllus seems to have made a good impression on the emperor.  There is a
story that Thrasyllus was a guest at one of Augustus's dinners.  At one point
Augustus improvised some lines of Greek poetry.  Then he turned to Thrasyllus
and asked him if he could name the author.  Thrasyllus said he did not know.
So the emperor improvised another line or two then asked Thrasyllus if he knew
now.  Thrasyllus wisely responded that he still did not know who the author
was, but whoever wrote it, the verses were very good.

Well Thrasyllus was undoubtedly closely involved in Augustus's 11 AD edict that
prohibited the determination of death dates and was probably also the one
responsible for the Augustus's own horoscope that he published.  It's also
probably around this time that Tiberius managed to obtain Roman citizenship for
Thrasyllus, which, at time was not easy for a foreigner to obtain.  But after
Augustus's death in 14 AD, Tiberius took over and Thrasyllus's status attained
new heights.  Tiberius arranged for Thrasyllus to marry a woman named Aka who
was a princess of the Kingdom of Commagene, one of Rome's client kingdoms to
the East.

Astrology continued to play an important role throughout the entirety of
Tiberius's reign.  One story has it that Tiberius had a dream in which a
certain man told him to pay him some money.  When Tiberius awoke he meditated
on the dream and its meaning for some time and then had the man that appeared
in his dream executed.  Tiberius reasoned that this was clearly a magic trick.
The man was testing Tiberius with something small, just giving him a little bit
of money.  But if Tiberius acquiesced to that request, he surely would
acquiesce to more substantial demands in the future.

Well, during Tiberius's reign there were a number of other high profile
convictions of aristocrats violating the proscriptions on astrology.  In the
interest of time I won't go into all of them.  For the most part, if you've
seen one you've seen them all.  At least from the records we have, they seem to
have been largely trumped up charges meant to eliminate any potential rivals or
just generally cow the aristocratic class.  Roman emperors used fear quite
effectively to maintain their power.  The emperors had networks of what we
would today call secret police who would try to root out disloyalty throughout
the empire.  You might be sitting in a popina, a Roman tavern, enjoying a
drink, when a stranger would sit down next to you and start loudly complaining
about the latest buffoonery of the emperor.  Perhaps he was just a simple
citizen with a grievance who wanted to vent.  But he could also be an agent of
the emperor looking for sedition.  Agree with him about the foolishness of the
emperor a little bit too enthusiastically and you might wake up the next day in
a prison being charged with treason.

At any rate, Tiberius outlived Thrasyllus, but not by very long.  In fact, not
long before Tiberius's death, Thrasyllus predicted that the emperor would live
another 10 years.  In fact Tiberius died about two years later, and Thrasyllus
shortly after that.  Now as it happened, Thrasyllus's son, Balbillus, also
decided to go into the family business and became an astrologer, as well.
Given the connections to the Roman aristocracy that Thrasyllus had developed,
Balbillus had the foundations for a very successful career as an imperial
astrologer, and perhaps as a consequence of growing up in the midst of it all,
he also happened to be quite adept at navigating the treacherous Roman politics
of the day.  After Tiberius died and his more unhinged successor Caligula took
the throne, Balbillus wisely decided to skip town for a little while and
puttered about in Alexandria.  After Caligula died and Claudius took the throne
he returned to Rome.  The relationship between Balbillus and Claudius somewhat
resembled that of Thrasyllus and Tiberius.  Thrasyllus had befriended Tiberius
when Tiberius was at a low point in his career and really had nothing to offer
in return.  Tiberius remembered that and always treated Thrasyllus well
thereafter.  Similarly, Claudius had been born with some disability, partly
physical, and possibly mental as well, the historical record isn't exactly
clear.  In ancient Rome, this essentially removed any possibility of him having
a political career.  Once it was clear as a child that he had whatever
disability it was, he was more or less ignored by his family.  It seems he
ended up spending a fair amount of time in the house of Thrasyllus since
Thrasyllus was such a good friend of the imperial family, and there he came to
know and befriend Balbillus as a child.  So, once again, the kind treatment
that Balbillus showed to Claudius when Claudius had nothing to offer them in
return was repaid in spades when Claudius donned the royal purple.

Claudius appointed Balbillus to a number of important posts, some of which were
really quite remarkable given that Balbillus wasn't of Roman ethnicity, though
he was a citizen.  During the invasion of Britain, Balbillus was appointed the
head of the engineering corps and performed admirably in that role.  Later on
Claudius appointed him high priest of the temple in Alexandria, overseer of the
imperial buildings in the city, and, most prestigious of all, head of the
Library of Alexandria.  For his part, Balbillus helped Claudius avert a
potential disaster.  He noticed that an upcoming solar eclipse was going to
occur on Claudius's birthday.  If this had caught people by surprise it clearly
would have been interpreted as a terrible omen.  To nip it in the bud Claudius
publicized the date and duration of the upcoming eclipse well in advance to
prove to his people that not even the heavens could take him by surprise.

But the next major astrological event occurred during the reign of the
subsequent emperor, Nero.  In the year 64, a comet appeared in the skies.  As
always, at least excepting Caesar's comet, this was interpreted as an omen of
doom, typically auguring the death of an emperor.  Not good news for Nero.  But
Balbillus presented Nero with a way out.  This comet augured doom, yes, but it
didn't necessarily have to augur doom for *him*.  If Nero proactively executed
a large number of aristocrats, that would indeed fulfill the comet's omen, the
death of lots of aristocrats being astrologically equivalent to the death of
one emperor.  Nero found Balbillus's advice to his liking and executed that
plan, and the aristocrats, with gusto.  It is perhaps ironic that one of the
means by which Nero effected his purge was by convicting people for violating
the regulations around astrology.

It's no surprise that Nero's persecution of the aristocracy did not exactly
endear him to them.  Relations between Nero and the aristocracy had always been
poor, but after these purges they descended into a spiral of violence.  Despite
Nero's desperate attempts to prevent it, rumors from the astrologers about
Nero's impending death swirled and four years later he killed himself during a
coup.

Nero's death then ushered in a period of civil war known as the Year of the
Four Emperors, in which a number of generals vied for control over the now
leaderless empire, four of whom were successful enough to claim to be emperor,
at least briefly.  In these chaotic times astrology played a yet more important
role than before.  Who was going to be emperor, what would the future bring?
There was no way to tell except by consulting an astrologer.  The first of the
four to claim the title of emperor, a general named Galba, had a plausible
astrological claim to the throne.  You'll recall that Tiberius was himself
proficient at astrology.  Early in his rule, Tiberius at one event met a number
of aristocratic youth, among whom was Galba when he was a boy.  Knowing Galba's
birthday, Tiberius recognized that the boy possessed an imperial horoscope.
Now, ordinarily, this would mean that the boy was a threat and would probably
have led to his demise.  But Tiberius saw in his horoscope that the boy would
become emperor only late in life and then only briefly, so he posed no threat
to Tiberius.  So when Tiberius met the boy he pinched his cheek and said, "One
day, child, you will taste a little of my power."

Well, indeed Galba did become emperor late in his life and ruled only briefly,
about six months, before he was assassinated, whereupon Otho took the title of
emperor.  Now, unlike the other contenders to the throne who were generals,
Otho was more a creature of the Senate and Roman politics.  Being from that
milieu he had the support of the astrologers in Rome, who, after all, depended
on the Roman aristocracy for their livelihood.  So as his competitors, the
generals Vitellius and Vespasian approached Rome with their armies, those
generals found themselves on the wrong side of astrological forecasts.  Now,
Vitellius was quite superstitious and frequently consulted diviners, but he
made an exception for astrology, which he had little respect for.  As an infant
his parents had had his horoscope cast and found that it harbored doom, and
they tried, unsuccessfully, to keep him away from positions of prominence in
Roman politics.  So, it's no wonder, then, that the ambitious Vitellius
preferred to believe that astrology was bunk.  As Vitellius marched on Rome, to
avoid the embarrassment that the astrologers were causing him by predicting his
imminent death, he decreed that all astronomers be banished from Rome,
effective October 1, 69 AD, giving them a few months to pack up and scram.  In
response, a number of astrologers put out defiant placards that stated that
they weren't going anywhere because Vitellius would not survive to October 1.
In the course of the next few months it seems that Vitellius executed any
astrologers he could find in Rome, but the records don't indicate precisely how
many that was.  As it happens, the astrologers were wrong, but not by much.
Vitellius was assassinated in December of that year and the fourth emperor in
the year of the four emperors, Vespasian, took power.

Now, throughout all this chaos, Balbillus had wisely made himself scarce.
There was no sense in publicly allying himself with an emperor if that emperor
was likely to be overthrown by a rival in a few months.  Balbillus seems to
have ended up in Ephesus where he maintained a low profile.  But once
Vespasian's claim to the throne appeared to be secure, he returned to Rome to
fulfill all the Emperor's astrological needs.  By now, Balbillus had outlasted
six emperors and he was able to ingratiate himself with the seventh.  Balbillus
seems to have had a good relationship with Vespasian.  Because of Balbillus's
residence in Ephesus, Vespasian granted the city of Ephesus the rare honor of
being permitted to celebrate the sacred games, which ordinarily could only be
done in Rome.  Nevertheless, Balbillus was unable to prevent his mother's
homeland, the Kingdom of Commagene, from being converted from a client kingdom
into an ordinary Roman province.  But he did at least manage to secure asylum
in Rome for the royal family after they did battle with the Roman legions sent
to enforce this order.

The main astrological event of Vespasian's rule was a comet that appeared in 79
AD.  Perhaps counseled by Balbillus, Vespasian didn't take it too seriously.
"Comet" in Greek literally translated to "long-haired star," so Vespasian joked
that it was clearly more of a threat to the long-haired king of Persia and not
himself since he himself was bald.  But nevertheless, Vespasian did die later
that year.

Balbillus then survived the next emperor, Titus, who ruled for two years before
dying of some illness, though rumors were always whispered that he had in fact
been poisoned by his brother, Domitian, who succeeded him to the throne.
Sometime during Domitian's reign, probably earlier rather than later, Balbillus
died, and the tremendous influence he and his father had been able to wield by
providing astrological advice to the throne throughout almost the entire first
century came to an end.  In addition to his political influence, which comes
down to us through later Roman chroniclers, Balbillus also wrote an
astrological treatise.  Summaries of it survive along with a few fragments.
Unsurprisingly, the main focus of the text is on predicting when a person will
die.  There is a rather amusing manuscript that almost provides some details
about Balbillus's astrology but then decides better of it.  The scribe
apparently had planned to write a chapter about it, which he entitled "What I
found useful in the work of Balbillus."  But then he seems to have had second
thoughts after reading through Balbillus and just wrote down "This chapter has
been omitted as useless."

Anyway, the death of Balbillus by no means meant that Roman emperors suddenly
stopped being interested in astrology.  Domitian, in particular, was a ruthless
ruler and to protect himself, proactively sought out nobles who had horoscopes
he believed to be regal and had them executed.  But the thing that troubled him
most was his own horoscope.  An astrologer, named Asclation had predicted that
he would die on September 18, 96 AD at noon.  Needless to say, as the day
approached, this prediction caused Domitian some anxiety.  The day before his
predicted death, he brought Asclation before him and asked him whether or not
he still believed that he would die the following day.  Asclation replied that
indeed he would.  Domitian then had an idea.  He asked Asclation what the
manner of Asclation's own death would be.  Asclation replied that he had seen
in the stars that he would be torn apart by dogs.  So Domitian ordered the
astrologer to be immediately burned at the stake.  Asclation was tied to a
stake in the Roman streets and a bonfire was lit underneath him.  But just as
the fire was growing, a sudden downpour quenched the fire and the Roman
soldiers ran to get out of the rain.  In the soggy mess, the stake holding the
half-burnt Asclation tipped to the side, and lying helpless in the street, a
pack of dogs came upon the astrologer and tore him to pieces.  Needless to say,
the reports of this event did not ease the anxiety of the emperor.

The following day, the day of his prophesied death, Domitian was distressed and
became more and more so until noon approached at which point he was a nervous
wreck.  Sometime around noon, however, he asked an attendant what the time was.
The attendant lied to him and gave him a time that was a few hours later.  The
danger had passed.  Immediately Domitian was filled with relief.  He decided to
take a bath, presumably to wash away the nervous sweat that he had been
dripping in all day long.  As he was happily on his way out, a court official
named Stephanus came in and asked for his signature on a few documents.
Stephanus had had an arm injury the past few days and had his arm was in a
sling.  Or so it seemed.  In fact, Stephanus's arm injury was all a ruse.  He
was a member of a conspiracy trying to assassinate the emperor, as was the
attendant who lied about the time.  Stephanus's sling concealed a dagger and
when he got close to the emperor, he pulled it out and stabbed Domitian to
death.

Now, when we hear these kinds of stories, it's worth asking did they actually
happen?  Of course, we cannot say for sure because we're relying on the
accounts of Roman historians who oftentimes were more interested in telling a
cracking good story than dispassionately conveying events as they happened.
But the story is more plausible than it might seem.  I mentioned at the outset
that astrology in the Roman empire had so much power precisely because people
believed it.  It had a way of becoming a self-fulfilling prophecy.  We know
that it was common for astrologers to predict the exact date of the death of an
emperor.  In fact, that was one of their main jobs, even if it was illegal.
Now, of course, a priori, Asclation could have had no way to know when the
Emperor would die and pulled the date September 18 out of thin air.  But once
Domitian's horoscope was known in court circles, that acted as an anchor point
for any conspiracies against the emperor.  After all, if you're going to
conspire to assassinate the emperor, you'd better have the stars on your side.
So the conspirators may have used that date to determine the timing of their
plot.

Well, I can't hope to cover the entirety of Roman history in a single episode,
so I'm going to skip ahead a few emperors to Hadrian, who was, along with
Tiberius, the other astrologer-emperor.  Hadrian's journey with astrology began
not long after he was born.  His great-uncle, who also had an interest in
astrology, declared that the boy had an imperial horoscope.  And if you recall
last episode I went into a bit of detail about what that specifically looked
like.  The main feature was that Jupiter was in its heliacal rising, or nearly
so anyway, the Moon was in conjunction with the Sun, and the other planets were
bunched around them in a sort of regal procession.  Hadrian was a bookish youth
and perhaps due to his auspicious horoscope he seems to have developed an
interest in astrology at a young age and read whatever he could on the subject.
For his first official post he was sent to the frontier out at the Danube river
and while there he came into contact with a local astrologer who verified the
portent of his horoscope.  Throughout his life, at the start of every year, he
would read the stars to forecast what would happen to him in the upcoming year.
If you've ever read God Emperor of Dune I can't quite help but feel that there
is a parallel here.  No doubt there was an element of propaganda in this story
--- don't even bother trying to overthrow the emperor because he's already
foreseen your actions months in advance. 

One of Hadrian's most lasting impacts on the heavens came about due to the
death of his lover Antinous.  Hadrian had been married to a woman named Vibia
Sabina who was his second cousin once removed, but the marriage was political
and Hadrian didn't really care for her.  But some years later, while on
campaign out east, Hadrian met a young man, or possibly a teenaged boy, named
Antinous.  Hadrian evidently fell deeply in love with Antinous and from that
time onward took him with him everywhere.  About seven years later, Hadrian and
Antinous were traveling down the Nile when Antinous drowned.  The standard
explanation is that this was an accident.  But more salacious stories have it
that Hadrian had Antinous sacrificed, possibly to avert danger that he had seen
in an astrological omen.  Either way, Hadrian deeply grieved Antinous's death
and fostered a cult to worship the young man.  Hadrian pronounced that like
Julius Caesar, Antinous had been catasterized --- he had been placed among the
stars as a small constellation just south of Aquila, the Eagle.  And from
thereon, the constellation of Antinous became frequently identified as one of
the constellations of the night sky in Western Europe up until 1930, when the
International Astronomical Union standardized the modern 88 constellations that
are officially recognized today.

Hadrian's faith in astrology may have been responsible for one other puzzling
feature of his reign.  Hadrian was always recognized as being one of the most
competent of the Roman emperors.  But historians have long wondered about the
arrangements he made for his succession.  Hadrian had no children of his own,
so towards the end of his life, he needed to line up a successor so that Rome
did not descend into civil war after his death.  Out of a number of worthy
candidates that Hadrian had available to him, he picked none of them, and
instead chose a consul named Lucius Aelius Caesar who apparently only excelled
at mediocrity.  History has no definitive explanation for Hadrian's bizarre
choice, but one natural possibility is that he was motivated by astrology.
Perhaps Lucius Aelius, despite what you might see with your own eyes, possessed
an imperial horoscope that destined him for greatness.  But if that is the
case, Hadrian's skills as an astrologer evidently failed him because Lucius
Aelius, who had always been sickly, died a few years later, before Hadrian's
own death.

Well, astrology continued to play a role in the Roman Empire for another few
centuries, really until the 4th century when the emperors converted to
Christianity.  As I've mentioned before, Christianity has always tended to have
an adversarial relationship with astrology.  It was always too popular, and, at
least according to its adherents, too powerful a tool to completely abandon.
But once Christianity spread, the nature of astrology changed.  Christianity,
as with Judaism, was incompatible with the fatalistic interpretation of
astrology, where one's destiny was written immutably in the stars.  But I will
have to save a more detailed discussion of the relationship between astrology
and this new religion of Christianity for a future episode.

This month's episode was mostly focused on the ways in which astrology
interacted with Roman politics, but didn't have to much to say about the
astrology itself.  Next month I will remedy that by looking at the one major
Roman contribution to astronomy, though mostly astrology, which was an early
first century text by an astrologer named Marcus Matilius called Astronomica.
I hope you'll join me then.  Until the next full moon, good night and clear
skies.

## Additional references
  
* Cramer, Astrology in Roman Law and Politics
