---
categories: episode
date: '2023-04-06'
description: We turn the clock back to the astronomy of the Paleolithic and Neolithic.  Clues
  about humanity's interest in the heavens during the Paleolithic can be seen in linguistic,
  mythological, and archaeological evidence.  In the Neolithic, groups of people constructed
  tens of thousands of megaliths across Europe, many of which had astronomical connections.
keywords:
- astronomy
- history
- archaeology
- paleolithic
- neolithic
layout: episode
number: 28
title: The Stars in Stone
---

## Transcript

Good evening and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon.  My
name is Joe Antognini.

Well, as you can perhaps gather from the title of this month's episode, I am
afraid that I have once more bamboozled the poor listeners of this podcast.
Despite my promise from the end of last episode, this episode will not be about
Egyptian astronomy.  As I was researching it, I found that most of the book
length treatments are fairly old at this point, going back to the 50s and 60s.
However, one of the leading experts on Egyptian astronomy, Juan Antonio
Belmonte has a new book coming out on Egyptian astronomy at the beginning of
May.  So I figured it would be worth postponing my episode on Egyptian
astronomy for a few months to wait for his book to come out so I can use the
latest research and so that you, dear listeners, can get the most up-to-date
story.

So what will I be talking about instead?  This month I wanted to talk about the
oldest astronomy we are aware of, the astronomy of the Paleolithic and
Neolithic.  But before we really get into it I want to take a step back and
give you a high level outline of where I'm planning on going over the course of
this podcast.  So far we've looked at the astronomy of the cultures of the
ancient near east and Mediterranean: the Babylonians, the Greeks, and the
Romans.  And as I mentioned, we'll get to the Egyptians in due time.  But what
I would like to do next is cover the rest of the ancient world.  My plan is to
very loosely follow expansion of mankind out of Africa.  So after learning
about Paleolithic and Neolithic astronomy in this episode, we'll then look at
the astronomy of sub-Saharan Africa, followed by the astronomy of India, then
the astronomy of China and east Asia.  Then we'll move south to the astronomy
of southeast Asia, followed by the astronomy of Oceania.  After that we'll
cross the Bering strait and look at the astronomy of the pre-Colombian
Americas, in particular the Mayans, whose astronomy was one of the most
sophisticated of all the ancient cultures.  And by now, of course, wise
listeners of this podcast should know to take any grand plans that I lay out
with a grain of salt.  So we'll see what actually happens.  But that's the plan
for now.

In terms of chronology, these episodes will flit back and forth across the
centuries much more than we may have become accustomed to.  In my treatment of
Greek astronomy we were able to go roughly chronologically from the Archaic
period starting around the 8th century BC up to Ptolemy in the Roman period in
the 3rd century AD.  But across the globe different cultures flourished at
different times, so we'll be ranging from the prehistory of 100 thousand years
ago to the 16th century AD and on occasion somewhat beyond.

One other caveat I should mention is that while I would like to devote as much
time to each one of these cultures as I did to Greek astronomy, it may not be
possible in most cases.  I may be able to come closer for some than others.
But unfortunately whether or not a culture developed writing makes a tremendous
difference in the amount of surviving material available to discuss.  We saw
that even with the Greeks, who left behind a tremendous written record, we had
to do a lot of speculation and cross correlation to make up for the huge number
of missing texts.  When studying cultures that left no written record at all,
our understanding necessarily becomes much, much more speculative.

Once we've worked our way around the globe, we'll pick up the thread to modern
astronomy once more by transitioning from the end of antiquity to the early
middle ages with the rise of Islam in Arabia in the 8th century.  From there
on, our focus will be largely Western, at least until we get to the 20th
century, when cultural contacts between the West and the rest of the globe
deepen to the point that the forefront of astronomical research becomes a
global rather than a purely Western project.  Needless to say, this whole
affair should keep us all occupied for the next few years to come.

Okay, with that broad overview of where I want to take the podcast, let's get
back to the topic of this episode.  This month I want to explore the very
earliest evidence we have for mankind's interest in the heavens during the
Paleolithic era, and then we'll see how later on in the Neolithic this interest
was articulated with the megalithic structures that dot western Europe.

Now before we get into any of the concrete evidence we have for early
humanity's interest in astronomy, it's worth outlining how we know what we know
about it, as little and speculative as it is.  Prehistoric peoples are
exceptionally difficult to study because by definition they lack writing, so
they never just told us all about themselves in the same way that the ancient
Greeks, or Egyptians, or Chinese, or Mayans did.  But there are other ways that
ancient cultures leave a record that we can learn from.  The most direct means
is from archaeology.  This can be in the form of the impressive monuments that
some cultures built like the pyramids of Egypt or Stonehenge in Britain.  But
smaller, more quotidian artifacts like pottery, arrowheads, axes, and so forth
are an extremely valuable record.  By looking at how artifacts with similar
styles spread across continents we can trace how groups of people migrated over
the millennia and where they settled.  Another means by which we can trace the
movements of people is through genetic analysis since the relics of these
movements persist in our genes right down to this day.  Most people throughout
history never really moved more than a few dozen miles from where they were
born, and this is still true today, though the majority is somewhat smaller
than it was centuries ago.  Since genetic patterns drift at a rate that can be
fairly well determined, by comparing the genetic similarity of two populations
you can figure out when the two populations diverged from each other.  The
genes of modern day people act as a kind of living fossil of their earlier
migration histories.  These kinds of genetic studies show, for instance, that
modern Europeans are largely a mixture of three waves of people: Western
Hunter-Gatherers, who were originally present in Europe at the end of the Ice
Age around 10,000 BC; a group called the Early European Farmers, who originated
in Anatolia around 20,000 years ago and then spread into Europe between 10,000
and 4000 BC; and a third group called the Western Steppe Herders who probably
originated in the area around modern day Ukraine, southwest Russia, and Armenia
and who rapidly spread across Eurasia between 3000 and 1000 BC, reaching as far
as western Europe, Persia, India, and central Asia.

In addition to archaeology and genetic studies, there is yet another, older way
to trace population movements.  In the same way that we inherit genes from our
parents with some number of mutations, we also generally inherit our parents'
language, and will change it very slightly.  By comparing the languages of
neighboring groups, historical linguists can also trace migration patterns.
Languages don't evolve totally randomly.  Linguistic change tends to follow
certain patterns.  Certain pairs of phonemes are more likely to be substituted
for each other, some phonemes in particular clusters are likely to be dropped
over time.  A shift in the sound of one vowel has a predictable effect on the
sounds of other vowels.  And these forces of random drift act more strongly on
some parts of language than others.  We are liable to change rarer words more
quickly than more frequently used words.  A small set of words that are very
fundamental to the human experience change only very slowly.  Words like
"mother," "tree," or "bird," maintain similarities across centuries, if not
millennia.  The word for "mother" in Punjabi, which is very distantly related
to English, but is in the same language family, is "māṁ."  Just as our genes
are a kind of living fossil we store in our bodies of earlier migration
patterns, the languages we speak are a kind of fossil we store in our minds.
In fact, the first evidence for the migration of the Western Steppe Herders
from Europe to India came long before Gregor Mendel founded the study of
genetics in the mid 19th century.  Philologists in the early 19th century
noticed linguistic commonalities across European, Iranian, and Indian languages
and hypothesized that these hundreds of languages must have derived from some
common language.  Today, we call this language Proto-Indo-European, and
associate it with the language of the Western Steppe Herders.

Historically, people have tended to treat linguistic evidence of population
movements a bit suspiciously.  It's always been a kind of ugly stepchild next
to genetic studies, which is the gold standard.  Historical linguistics tends
not to have same level of rigorous mathematical modeling that genetic studies
do.  You just sort of imagine a linguistics department being a long corridor of
offices with a professor in each one going "ga ga ga, ta ta ta, la la la" to
themselves all day long and then writing up a paper on how Hungarians
originated from western Siberia and split from that group in the 4th millennium
BC.  Being married to a linguist, I can tell you that, while I'm being slightly
facetious, this conception is not too far off the mark.  But nevertheless,
linguistic methods seem to work.  Most of the major population migrations were
initially proposed from linguistic evidence and only later confirmed through
genetic studies.

It's from linguistic evidence in the Proto-Indo-European language that we can
see some of the early interest in astronomy of the Western Steppe Herders.  I
mentioned in an earlier episode that in English the word "month" is
etymologically connected to the word "moon," and "menstruation."  But this
connection is not unique to English.  It appears generally throughout the
Indo-European language family.  This suggests that the identification of a time
period associated with the cycle of the Moon, and a connection between the
length of this cycle and the menstrual cycle goes all the way back to the
Western Steppe Herders of the Neolithic Era.  In other words, Neolithic people
were observing the heavens and connecting what they saw above to what they
experienced on the Earth.

There's a yet more abstract way that cultural memories persist through the
centuries, and this is through folklore and mythology.  In the same way that
linguists have systematically categorized the sounds of languages and studied
how phonemes tend to drift, ethnographers have collected and categorized folk
tales across different peoples and measured their similarities.  Here we are
yet another step away from mathematical rigor, but there is nevertheless very
compelling evidence that, like language, folktales tend not to change very
quickly.  One folktale, really more a family of similar folktales, called the
Smith and the Devil, has variants across the Indo-European languages, and has
been traced back to be at least 6000 years old.

Well, one of the richest sources of mythology is, of course, the heavens.  In
the Western canon the myths associated with the constellations all derive from
Greek culture, but every culture has mythological stories associated with the
heavens.  This on its own is highly notable.  Human cultures vary wildly across
the globe, so much so that any kind of cross-cultural universals are rather
rare and must tell us something that is more fundamental about humanity.  So,
taking an interest in the heavens appears to be a universal of the human
condition.  And there is some very intriguing evidence that this interest goes
back very far back into humanity's past.  One of the most remarkable features
on the sky is the Pleiades star cluster.  The Pleiades is an open star cluster
somewhat close to the celestial equator, so it is visible to every people on
the planet and being visually impressive, virtually every culture has a myth
associated with this object.  In Western astronomy, this myth is Greek in
origin and tells of how there were seven sisters, born from the god Atlas.
After Atlas was condemned to carry the vault of heaven on his shoulders, these
catch the eye of Orion.  Being unprotected by their father, Orion pursues them
and they ultimately commit suicide, whereupon Zeus placed them in the heavens.
But later on, one of the seven, Electra, became so distressed after seeing the
destruction of Troy,  she let down her hair in mourning and became invisible,
or in other tellings, a comet that then fell from the sky.  Among several
Aboriginal groups in Australia there is a similar story.  The Wirangu people of
southwest Australia identify Orion as a hunter named Tgilby.  Tgilby falls in
love with seven sisters and chases them.  Among the Cheyenne in North America,
the daughter of a chief was visited by a strange man, who turned out to be a
dog in human form.  She later gave birth to seven puppies who were placed into
the heavens.

Across the globe, these stories have a common feature.  A large majority of
them identify the stars with seven things --- seven sisters, seven puppies,
seven boys, seven chickens and so forth.  But there is a problem.  If you go
outside and actually count the Pleiades, there are only six of them.  The
cluster itself has many more stars, of course, but you can only see six with
your naked eye.  So why do most cultures have a myth in which there are seven
Pleiades?  What is especially intriguing is that many cultures have a story in
which there were *originally* seven, but one of them got lost along the way
somehow, like in the Greek myth with Electra.  Another example comes from the
Cherokee who say that there were once seven boys who only wanted to play and
would not do their chores.  One day they were running around in a circle and
they spun around so fast that they all rose up into the sky.  But as they were
rising, one of the boys was too slow and fell back down to the Earth.  Now, as
it happens today there are two bright stars in the Pleiades which are very
close together, so we cannot distinguish them by eye.  By eye, they appear to
be one star.  But stars all have random motions, called proper motions, and if
you reverse the motions of the stars in the Pleiades you find that about
100,000 years in the past these two stars were far enough apart to be
distinguished and people would have counted seven stars in the Pleiades.  If
this is the real origin of the preponderance of myths in which the Pleiades is
identified with the number seven, then it suggests that humanity's interest in
astronomy dates back very early into our history.

Another intriguing example of the long history of astronomical mythology has to
do with bear myths, and in particular so-called "Bear Son" tales which appear
across the Northern Hemisphere, from western Europe across Siberia all the way
to North America.  Many of these cultures have a special reverence for bears.
People have been awed for millennia at the strength of bears and their ability
to go months through the winter without any food or water, and many groups have
even claimed that they are descended from bears.

The Spanish linguist Roslyn Frank once told a story of how she came to learn of
the special reverence that the Basque held for the bears.

> Many years ago, when I first decided to do fieldwork in [the Basque Country]
> it quickly became apparent to me that I would need to learn [Basque]. Soon
> after I had gained enough proficiency in the language to carry on a basic
> conversation, a strange thing began to happen to me.  People would take me
> aside and tell me the following in a low voice, as if they were sharing a
> very important yet almost secretive piece of knowledge: "We Basques used to
> believe we descended from bears." The first time someone told me this, I had
> no idea what I should say in response. I found the statement totally amazing.
> Yet over and over again the same thing happened to me.  People, who didn't
> know each other, who had no contact with each other, ended up telling me the
> same thing.

These cultures have a family of similar folktales which are called "Bear Son"
tales.  The general shape that these stories take is that a hero is descended
from bears.  Either he is born of a bear and a woman, or perhaps he was
abandoned and was raised by bears.  Either way, he grows up with bear-like
strength.  Then he assembles a group of warriors who defend some place, perhaps
a home, a town, a castle, or a land, after some sort of monster attacks it.  He
is able to injure the monster and chase it away, and then pursues the monster
all the way underground or perhaps even to the netherworld.  In the Western
Canon, the most familiar Bear Son story is a portion of an Old English epic
poem entitled Beowulf.  Beowulf is, of course, the hero, and while he isn't
born of a bear, his name probably derives from the old English "bee hunter,"
which is a roundabout way of saying a "bear" since bears have been known since
ancient times for raiding beehives for honey.  And this kind of roundabout way
of saying "bear" is not unusual for these cultures.  One of the indicators of
the respect that ancient peoples paid to bears is that many languages did not
directly refer to them.  To name a bear directly was a kind of taboo and the
word would be avoided lest by saying its name, a bear might appear.  So in
Germanic languages, English included, the word for bear ultimately derives from
the word "brown," a bear simply being the "brown one."  At any rate, Beowulf,
the bear warrior, and his companions do battle against the monster Grendel who
has attacked a great hall.  After defeating Grendel, Grendel's mother next
attacks the great hall, killing one of Beowulf's companions.  Beowulf and his
men then track her down to her lair whereupon he kills her in a great battle.

Well, the mythology around bears in these northern cultures is not limited to
terrestrial stories.  Most of these groups interpret the constellation we now
call Ursa Major, the Great Bear, as a bear and have similar stories explaining
how this group of stars came to be.  The general pattern is that a group of
hunters were chasing a bear and the bear escaped into the heavens.  These
stories exist for dozens and dozens of cultures, from the Basque in northern
Spain, to the Siberians, to the Ojibwe of the Great Lakes region, the Iroquois
of Northeast America, the Inuit of Alaska and northern Canada, the Tlingit of
the Pacific northwest, and the Pueblo of the Southwest.

The similar folklore around the constellation Ursa Major from the Basque to the
Iroquois suggests that these tales were probably in place before these groups
split up, which would date the association of this group of stars to
representing a bear as being at least 13,000 years old.

So, from linguistic and mythological evidence, the similar etymology of moon,
month, and menstruation, along with the Pleiades and Bear-Son myths we can
reasonably conclude that humanity has taken an interest in the heavens and made
a connection between what they saw above to the world around them certainly at
least 10,000 years in the past, and very probably much, much earlier than that
as well.  Now you might quibble with how much stock we should place in any one
of these lines of reasoning.  You could argue, for instance, that something
about the Big Dipper looks inherently bear-like to the human brain and that all
these northern peoples independently came to describe the asterism as a bear
long after they had split up.  But at the same time, I think we are all
familiar with what bears look like and what the Big Dipper looks like, and
let's face it, the two don't really resemble each other all that closely.  And
in point of fact, many cultures which broken off even earlier have different
associations with this grouping of stars.  In China and Japan the stars were
seen as a dipper, which is a much more logical interpretation of these stars.
In southeast Asia it is seen as a kind of crustacean, a shrimp or a lobster.
At any rate, I think it's fair to say that while none of these pieces of
evidence on their own may be conclusive, taken together, the case for a long
history of interest in the heavens is a lot stronger.

A thornier question is why this interest developed in the first place.  And
this question is really just one question from a whole class of questions not
just limited to the development of astronomy.  It is very difficult to
disentangle cause and effect when understanding the development of
civilizations.  Did population clusters arise because of the development of
agriculture?  Or were the population clusters there to begin with and those
clusters facilitated the development of agriculture?  In the 19th and first
part of the 20th century the standard story was generally that agriculture came
first and allowed the growth of population clusters that otherwise couldn't
have been supported.  But today the story isn't so clear.  The very earliest
settlements known like Gobekli Tepe in Anatolia have evidence that they
predated agriculture and were not continually inhabited, but perhaps inhabited
only seasonally.  So it's possible that early population centers were places
where disparate tribes would intermittently gather to trade, perform religious
rituals, and intermarry.  Maybe over time some people stayed in that area for
longer periods of time until it became their permanent dwelling.  Since people
would bring high quality food from a wide region perhaps some of the seeds
would be sown in the area at first accidentally, and then later more
deliberately, and these regions would have become proto-farms.  At any rate
there are many different kinds of stories that have been told about the
development of civilization and it's tricky to unambiguously rule out all but
one story.

So with the development of astronomy, one story that has been told is a very
practical one.  People needed to keep track of the seasons to know when to reap
and sow if they were agricultural, or to track animal migration patterns if
they were hunter-gatherers, and astronomy was the means of timekeeping.  This
motivated their interest in the heavens.  In this story, the mythological
stories perhaps began as a kind of mnemonic device.  But another, equally
compelling story you could tell was that the early interest in astronomy was
fundamentally religious and that its later use as an aid for agriculture or
hunting was a later accretion.  And, truth be told, trying to separate out
these two stories might be a hopelessly modern kind of project.  In the
pre-modern worldview separating the migrations of animals and the natural cycle
of the seasons from their religious attitudes just may not be possible.

Well, in addition to this kind of linguistic and mythological evidence for
prehistoric astronomy, as I mentioned earlier there is also more tangible
archaeological evidence.  And for the rest of this episode I'm going to focus
on the archaeological evidence we see in Europe.  We'll focus on other areas of
the world in later episodes.

There are two main kinds of astronomical artifacts we see in prehistoric
Europe.  One is prehistoric art, and the other is in the megalithic structures
that dot the continent.

The prehistoric art of Europe tends to be both older than the megaliths and
also more enigmatic.  One of the older pieces of art is a work that is today
called the Venus of Laussel.  It's a bas relief carving into limestone in the
southwest of France that is estimated to be about 25,000 years old.  Since it
has no organic material it can't be dated with carbon-14, so the date comes
from comparing it to other artifacts in a similar style.  Archaeologists and
anthropologists have identified a number of distinct paleolithic cultures that
inhabited Europe from 50,000 years ago until the Neolithic.  The Aurignacian
was one of the oldest, and the Magdalenian one of the newer cultures.
Somewhere in the middle, at the height of the Ice Age, around 33,000 to 17,000
years ago was the Gravettian culture, which spanned Europe from Portugal to
Poland, with some sites being found even as far east as Moscow.  This culture
is particularly known for its fondness of what are called Venus figurines,
small statues of a woman with exaggerated features, wide hips, a large abdomen
and large breasts, and narrow or even missing arms and legs, and oftentimes no
face.  The Venus of Laussel neatly fits into this stylistic pattern except that
in one of her arms she is holding something in the shape of a horn or crescent.
This horn has 13 notches in it.  Now, as with all Paleolithic art, we really
have very little context to interpret the work, so any interpretations are
necessarily highly speculative.  But at least one interpretation is that the
crescent shape she is holding is suggestive of the crescent of the Moon.  And
the number 13 would then correspond to the number of months or menstrual cycles
in a year.

A much better known and very impressive site is the Lascaux caves, also in
southwestern France.  These caves contain some 600 paintings dating back around
17,000 years.  They mostly depict large animals, bulls, bison, an ancient
relative of cows called aurochs and so forth.  But intriguingly, some of the
animals additionally have dots nearby.  One of the most suggestive of these is
a bull who has a cluster of six dots above his shoulder, along with a cluster
of dots on his face.  The placement of the dots on the bull, along with the
shape of their cluster and his overall position highly resembles the
constellation of Taurus, with the cluster of six dots above the shoulder
representing the Pleiades star cluster and the cluster of dots on the face of
the bull representing the Hyades cluster.  But most intriguing of all in the
Lascaux caves is a set of paintings in a deep shaft, separated from the rest of
the complex.  These paintings are much more difficult to get to and seem to
have been in a kind of holy of holies, which suggests that they have special
status.  In this shaft there are three animals: on one wall there is a
rhinoceros on the left and a bison on the right.  On the opposite wall is a
horse.  Beneath the tail of the rhinoceros is a cluster of six dots in two rows
of three.  The bison has been killed and his intestines are hanging out.  Then
between the two animals is a rather crudely drawn man, almost a stick figure.
And we know that it is a man because the artist included a rather prominent
penis.  But the figure's head appears to have a beak like a bird.  There is a
rather remarkable contrast between the artistic detail of the three animals
with the crudeness with which the man is depicted.  Beneath this man is a
vertical stick with a simple outline of a bird that looks sort of like a
cartoon duck perched on top.

So, what does this scene mean?  Now when we're dealing with the art of a
civilization 17,000 years removed from us and where we have no other context,
our interpretations are going to be highly speculative.  It's become something
of a trope that when archaeologists come across some artifact whose purpose
they don't immediately understand, they just say that it must have been used in
a religious ritual of some kind.  Naturally most interpretations of the cave
paintings of Lascaux assume that they had some kind of religious significance
and were created and visited ritualistically to ensure good hunts.  And I think
it's hard to deny that there must be something to that picture.  But one
elaboration of this kind of interpretation of the scene of the bird-man is that
there is a celestial connection.  Many cultures across the world have special
figures in their society, generically termed "shamans," who provide a kind of
point of contact for the group between the material world and the spiritual
realm, and across many cultures shamans are frequently associated with birds.
This was true across many Native American groups and has been seen in
archaeological artifacts as well, such as the Ust-Tartas site in Siberia, where
a shaman was buried 5000 years ago wearing a headdress consisting of several
dozen bird beaks.  The association is intuitive --- just as birds fly off to
distant lands, so too does the shaman fly off to the spiritual realm.  This
would then suggest that the bird-man depicted in the painting is a shaman
undergoing a trance.  Now, when this painting was created, due to the
precession of the equinoxes, the north celestial pole was quite a ways away
from where it currently is today.  The pole was right in the center of a bright
asterism called the Summer Triangle, which consists of the stars Deneb, Altair,
and Vega.  Deneb and Altair are the brightest stars in the constellations
Cygnus, the swan, and Aquila, the eagle, and both of these constellations
fairly reasonably resemble birds.  So the thought is that this painting may
have depicted the heavens.  The shaman has entered into the spiritual realm of
the heavens.  The vertical stick with the bird on top represents the pole of
heaven about which the whole structure revolves.  Then the three animals
represent large constellations arrayed about the pole.  The horse would
correspond to the modern day constellation of Leo, the rhinoceros to the modern
day Taurus, and the bison to the modern day Capricornus.

Well, some of you may find these interpretations intriguing, but it's fair if
others of a more skeptical bent don't find them entirely convincing.  So let's
turn now to another set of artifacts where the celestial connection is somewhat
more solid.  These are the megalithic structures that appear throughout Europe.
These structures have been known to locals who lived around them down the
centuries, they're often hard to miss, but apart from some folktales around
them, they were largely ignored.  They only seriously began to be studied in
the 19th century.  By the early 20th century, the consensus opinion was that
they must have been built in the 2nd millennium at the earliest.  The idea was
that it was known that civilization had developed in the Fertile Crescent
sometime in the 4th millennium BC, and these structures were too technically
sophisticated to have been built independently, so the local cultures had to
wait for the cultural knowledge of how to construct megalithic structures to
diffuse from the near east out to western Europe.  It was only with the
development of radiocarbon dating in the middle of the 20th century that it
became clear that many of these structures predate the civilizations of the
Mesopotamian by several millennia.  These structures are associated with the
transition from the Paleolithic Era to the Neolithic Era, when there was a
large scale transition from a nomadic hunter-gatherer lifestyle to a more
settled farming or herding lifestyle.

Now, there are some 30,000 megaliths throughout Europe alone, so I'll have to
limit myself to talking about a few of the more prominent examples along with
some general characteristics that these structures share.  Broadly speaking,
there are three kinds of components in megaliths.  The simplest of these is
what is called a "menhir" and consists of a single standing stone.  Now, while
a stone just sitting there doesn't seem all that impressive, many of these
stones were quite large, weighing several tons and originated from many miles
away.  Transporting the stone and setting it upright required tremendous
effort.  And in many cases the stone was "dressed," that is to say, it was
smoothed, and some stones were even decorated with carvings.  The second kind
of component of a megalith is a "dolmen," which consists of two stones or two
rows of stones standing upright slightly apart from each other, and then a
third stone, usually much larger, lying flat on top of them.  The third
component of megaliths is called a "henge" and consists of a ditch carved into
the Earth, enclosed by a bank, and often with a ring of stones in the interior.
A megalith may have just one or all three of these components.

Now, before getting into a couple of examples it's worth dwelling a little bit
on what kind of an astronomical connection we're looking for in these
structures.  By and large, this connection has to do with the orientation of
the structure.  For instance, if the structure had some kind of axis that was
exactly north-south or east-west, this would be strong evidence that the
structure had some kind of astronomical significance.  Now we today might see
that and wonder what is really so astronomical about it.  After all if you look
at virtually any city in built in the last hundred years, the roads are almost
always laid out on a north-south east-west grid.  We don't think of the urban
planners of, say, Tulsa, Oklahoma as building their roads to manifest a
connection between their city and to the cosmos.  It's just a convenient
geographical layout --- if you're giving someone directions you can tell them
to go three blocks north and then two blocks to the east.  But this is a very
modern way of thinking about it.  After all, the notion that the cardinal
directions, north-south, east-west are inherently *geographic* presupposes a
heliocentric model of the universe, or at least one in which the Earth rotates
on its axis.  But prehistoric peoples had no such conception.  The directions
north and south had nothing in particular to do with the Earth.  It was an
exclusively astronomical association.  North was the direction around which the
stars rotated at night, east was the direction that the Sun rose in the
morning, and west was the direction that it set.  So if we see any alignments
of megaliths along cardinal directions we have to understand that this
represented an astronomical orientation.  Now in practice we actually find that
alignments along the east-west direction are relatively rare.  Although the Sun
rises generally in the east, it only rises precisely due east on two days of
the year: the two equinoxes.  But as we saw in our tour of Greek astronomy,
measuring the dates of the equinoxes is relatively challenging compared to
measuring the dates of the solstices.  With the solstices you can simply mark
where on the horizon the Sun rises or sets.  The summer solstice occurs when
this point is the furthest north.  And, in practice, because the position
doesn't change too much for a few days around the solstice, you can figure it
out when you notice that the Sun has stopped advancing northward.  But unless
you've already marked out what direction is east and west it's hard to figure
out when the equinox is with too much accuracy.  And marking the east-west
direction accurately is a difficult task on its own and would probably require
a gnomon to trace the path of the Sun in the sky.  So what we find in the
megaliths is that orientations tend to be toward the point on the horizon where
the Sun rose or set on the solstices rather than the equinoxes.

Now, if we're trying to understand the astronomical connection of megaliths
there are two ways we can go about it.  One is on a case-by-case basis.  If we
see a structure with a precise alignment towards a direction of astronomical
significance, like the position the Sun rises on a solstice or equinox, we can
generally assume that there must have been some astronomical connection for
this structure.  The second way is statistical.  If we collect many similar
structures we may find that relatively few of them have a precise astronomical
alignment.  But in aggregate there may be a clear preference in orientation.
There are, for instance, hundreds of similar dolmen structures in southern
Spain and Brittany.  Few are precisely oriented towards a solstice or equinox.
But 185 out of 201 are aligned between east and south.  The odds of this
clustering occurring by chance are vanishingly small.  And in several cases the
exceptions seem to prove the rule.  One structure called Dolmen de Menga in
Andalusía is a passage tomb whose entrance is not oriented in this
southeasterly direction.  But if you stand in its corridor and look out you
find that you are looking at a rather remarkable rock outcrop in the distance
that bears the striking resemblance of a giant head lying on the ground and
looking up at the sky.  So in this case the builders seem to have chosen an
unusual non-astronomical orientation due to the unique geological features of
the area.

By the late Neolithic, around the time of the development of polished stone
axes, say around 3000 BC, a new kind of megalithic structure starts to appear,
particularly in western Britain, which are called stone circles, probably the
most famous being the stone circle at Castlerigg.  As you might infer, these
are a collection of standing stones in a rough circle, usually around 30 meters
across with around 30 stones.  Incidentally, these circles are somewhat
flattened which might initially seem to suggest that they were built a little
haphazardly.  But most of these stone circles are flattened in a similar kind
of way, which suggests that the shaping was deliberate, though what the meaning
of this shape was is unclear.  In addition to the stones that form the circle,
there are often two rows of stones attached to one part of the circle that form
a sort of entrance corridor into the center of the circle.  Generally these
entrance corridors are roughly oriented towards the east.  A lot of work has
gone into studying the orientations of pairs of stones in the circle, drawing a
sort of chord across the circle.  In some structures like Castlerigg there does
seem to be some intriguing alignments towards, for instance the position of
sunrise on the cross-quarter days, that is, the days halfway between the
solstice and equinox.  And even more intriguing there are potential alignments
with the position of certain moonrises, known as lunar standstills.

As I've mentioned before, the orbit of the Moon is inclined with respect to the
ecliptic, so sometimes the Moon is further north of the ecliptic and other
times further south.  Once a month it reaches its northernmost position and
then once a month it reaches its southernmost position, and these events are
called lunar standstills.  Due to the roughly 18 year precession of the lunar
orbit the maximum or minimum declination of the Moon changes by about 10
degrees, and when this excursion reaches its maximum value it is called a major
lunar standstill.  At high latitudes like northern England and Scotland, the
major lunar standstill can be quite an impressive affair.  We're all familiar
with how surprisingly large the Moon can look when it is low on the horizon.
At these high latitudes, when the Moon is at the southern portion of a major
lunar standstill, the Moon rises very close to due south.  This means that it
travels in a low arc, skirting the horizon, making it appear extremely large
the entire time it is up.  So we tend to find stronger evidence for these kinds
of lunar alignments in the megaliths of northern England, where the major lunar
standstill would have been more visually impressive.

Well, we can't talk about European megaliths without bringing up the one
everyone knows and loves: Stonehenge.  Stonehenge was built in an area that had
long been inhabited, at least since 8000 BC.  But it isn't really a single
structure, instead was built in three main phases.  The first phase did not
really bear much of a resemblance to what we think of when we imagine
Stonehenge today.  Around 4000 BC a henge was constructed, a ditch and an
earthen bank, about 3 kilometers long and 100 meters wide and burial sites were
placed nearby.  Nearly 1000 years later a circular ditch was dug about 2 meters
deep and 110 meters in diameter.  The earth removed from the ditch was mounded
to form a circular ring on the inner edge of the ditch.  Then around the area
are 56 pits about a meter in diameter which were used for cremation and burial.

About 500 years later the third phase of construction began and this is when
stones get introduced and Stonehenge as we imagine it really started to take
shape.  Now, where the builders of the various megaliths across Europe got
their materials varied.  In the case of many dolmens, the builders probably
built the structure around the large capstone so that the rock did not have to
be transported anywhere, but just lifted vertically.  But many other megaliths
show evidence that their rocks were transported from miles away.  But
Stonehenge is really quite remarkable because during the initial stages of this
third phase of construction, the culture responsible for building it
transported 80 stones from about 150 miles away, each stone being about 2
meters tall and weighing about 4 or 5 tons.  It was long thought that this task
was far too monumental for a Neolithic civilization and that instead these
stones must have been found much closer to the Stonehenge site, deposited there
by glaciers at the end of the last Ice Age.  But the main issue with this
theory is that the builders would have had to have used absolutely every stone
in the region for this structure because no isolated stones exist.
Nevertheless, one of the principal mysteries of Stonehenge is just why the
builders went to so much effort to obtain these particular stones and put them
in this particular place, along with the more technical question of just how
they managed to accomplish this feat.

These 80 stones were arranged in two concentric rings with an entrance on the
north-eastern side, along with a pair of stones outside the entrance called
Heel Stones.  Then a few hundred years later a second set of 30 stones were
moved into the inner circle and an additional 30 stones were balanced in a ring
on top of the 30 standing stones.  This is when Stonehenge took the iconic form
you conjure in your mind when you imagine Stonehenge.  The stones from this
phase actually came from quite a bit closer, and were only transported from
around 30 miles away.  Within this innermost ring the builders arranged another
set of stones in a horseshoe shape whose mouth faced the entrance to the
complex.  These are the largest stones in the entire structure, with the
biggest being more than 7 meters in height.  Presuming that Stonehenge served a
religious function, this horseshoe would have acted as a kind of holy of
holies.

Now Stonehenge has fascinated generations and has attracted wild theories about
its significance to the Neolithic people who constructed it.  As the
archaeologist Jacquetta Hawkes put it, "Every age gets the Stonehenge it
deserves---and desires."  There have been theories about how it was a
sophisticated ancient observatory and that it computed lunar eclipses since the
56 holes in the outer ring would correspond to one quarter of a Saros cycle.
But these kinds of ideas are at best speculative and in the wilder cases
downright kooky.  The main astronomical feature of Stonehenge is that the
orientation of the entrance corridor and inner horseshoe is towards the
solstices.  If you are standing outside looking in, you would be looking in the
direction of sunset on the winter solstice.  In other words, in the depth of
winter, you would observe the Sun seem to set into the heart of the structure
itself.  By symmetry if you are standing inside the structure looking out, this
would be the direction of sunrise on the summer solstice.  There is one other
plausible astronomical feature of Stonehenge in the positioning of four unique
stones around the outer ring, called Station Stones.  These form a rectangle
inscribed in the circle, and the direction of the longer axis of this rectangle
is reasonably aligned with the direction of the major lunar standstill.

Well, there is a lesser known sister site to Stonehenge, named Woodhenge.
Woodhenge is about 2 miles northeast and as its name implies it was made of
wood rather than stone, so not too much remains of it today.  But from the
remains, there was an oval ring about 85 meters wide made of wooden posts in
six concentric rings.  These posts would have been no joke, based on the holes
they sat in, archaeologists estimate that they would have been some 8 meters
tall and weighed a few tons.  Woodhenge is aligned along the same axis as
Stonehenge, but in the opposite direction.  So if you were standing outside the
structure looking in, you would see the sunrise on the summer solstice seem to
come out of the structure.  Stonehenge and Woodhenge also differ in the fossil
remains present.  There is a large quantity of butchered pig bones around
Woodhenge, which suggests that great feasts which took place there, but
Stonehenge instead contains human bones.  The picture that emerges is that
these two structures complemented each other, with Woodhenge being a place of
the living and Stonehenge being a place of the dead.  This is reflected in the
orientation of Woodhenge towards sunrise on the summer solstice which would be
suggestive of the flowering of life, whereas the orientation of Stonehenge
towards sunset on the winter solstice would have been associated with death.
What's more, we see this association in the materials that each structure used,
inanimate stone for Stonehenge and a living material for Woodhenge.  And in
fact this kind of association is not unique to the Neolithic, there are groups
in Madagascar, for instance, that continue to build megalithic structures right
down to this day, and they have the same association of wood with the living
and stone with the dead.

Another of the most impressive European megaliths is a complex of three
structures built around 3200 BC along the Bru na Boinne river in eastern
Ireland, called Newgrange, Knowth, and Dowth.  Each of these structures is a
large burial mound around 90 meters wide with a kind of stone wall around the
edge.  Newgrange has a stone passage that leads you into a somewhat larger
central chamber, whereas Dowth and Knowth both have two such passages.  The
structures appear to have been built inside out, with the inner chamber being
constructed first, then the stone passageway, and the earth being piled on top
of it all afterwards.  One piece of evidence for this is that inside one of the
chambers at Knowth there is a large stone that might have acted as a kind of
altar or religious artifact.  Or at least, there used to be such a stone inside
the chamber.  At some point over the centuries some group of people tried to
steal it.  They started to drag it out of the passageway but discovered midway
through that the passage narrows and the stone actually cannot fit through the
passage and get out so they abandoned it there.

Like other megaliths of this kind, Newgrange, Knowth, and Dowth were tombs and
contain burnt and unburned human remains.  But it seems that not just anyone was
buried in one of these structures.  DNA from one of the individuals indicates
that his parents were probably brother and sister.  This kind of extreme incest
generally only occurs in royal families where it is important to preserve a
bloodline, so this implies that burial in these grand megaliths was reserved
for a small number of important people in a community.

As with Stonehenge, the main astronomical feature is the alignment of these
passages with the solstices, the winter solstice in particular.  For a long
time, however, there was a mystery about the nature of this alignment.  The
passages are indeed oriented towards the winter solstice, but the passage is
sloped downwards underground.  Due to this downward curve you cannot actually
see the sunrise inside of the central chamber.  Nevertheless, folktales from
the Irish locals indicated that there was a strong connection between the
monument and the solstice.  During its excavation in the 1960s, the
archaeologist Michael O'Kelly discovered a smaller opening above the entrance
to the passage, called the "roof box."  It originally appeared to have some
moveable slabs so that it could be opened and closed.  When it was opened,
O'Kelly discovered that on the winter solstice, it allowed the light from the
sun to pass all the way into the central chamber.

These structures contain some of the most remarkable examples of Neolithic art.
The stones that ring them and line the passages are decorated with a panoply of
abstract shapes, spirals, circles, dots, and squiggles.  During the 60s and
70s, some archaeologists did a little bit of, shall we say, extracurricular
research and noticed that the shapes on these megaliths are rather psychedelic
and resemble the patterns that one hallucinates during an acid trip and so they
suggested that perhaps these shapes were inspired by the patterns that shamans
saw during their hallucinogenic trances.

But one of the most intriguing set of inscriptions is at Knowth where there is
a stone with a set of 29 crescents and circles.  Now, anytime you hear the
number 29 your spidey-sense should immediately tingle since this isn't a random
number, it's the number of days in a synodic month, the time from full moon to
full moon.  So this set of crescents and circles may have been one of the
earliest lunar calendars.

Incidentally this is not the only potential lunar calendar on a megalith.
There is also a passage tomb in Brittany called "Gavr'inis."Like many other
megaliths, the passage is oriented towards the direction of the winter
solstice, but unlike many other megaliths, the tomb is lavishly decorated.
There are 29 stones along the sides of the passage and the slabs are decorated
with what appear to be shepherd's crooks, with 29 of these symbols on the left
side and 27 on the right.  Once again your spidey-sense should tingle.  29 is
the number of days in the synodic month and 27 is the number of days in the
sidereal month.  More speculatively, there are also 19 other curved snake-like
symbols and 19 is the number of years in a Metonic cycle.

Incidentally, one of the interesting features that Gavr'inis shares with
Newgrange is that many of the stones appear to have been reused.  Some of the
slabs have decorations that were facing away from the passage into the Earth,
so that they were hidden from view, and these decorations appear to be broken
off partway through.  The carvings on one of the slabs can be matched up with
another broken slab in a separate megalith a few miles away.  What probably
happened here is that the builders of Gavr'inis scavenged the material of an
older nearby megalith, but were careful to hide away prior carvings so that
they would not mar the aesthetics of the new work.  Gavr'inis is not the only
example of Neolithic builders scavenging material from earlier megaliths.  There
is an extremely large stone originating from Locmariaquer in Brittany which was
the largest known, originally over 20 meters tall and weighing about 330 tons.
Originally the stone was decorated with geometric patterns.  But at some point
the rock was broken up into four pieces, probably deliberately.  These pieces
were then transported a few miles to several separate sites.  The original
decorations were turned inwards to hide them from view and new decorations were
carved onto the other side.  Evidently these structure was constructed prior to
the formation of historical preservation societies.

The last megalith I'll mention is further south and is actually a set of
megaliths on the island of Menorca, one of the islands of the Balearic Islands
in the Mediterranean near Spain.  As I mentioned towards the beginning, the
early theories of the development of megaliths were that these structures
originated in the Fertile Crescent, or maybe Egypt or India, and then spread
west to Europe.  But the megaliths of the Mediterranean come much later than
the megaliths of the British Isles and Western Europe.  Around 1000 BC hundreds
of megaliths were were constructed on the island, including dozens of
structures which are called "taulas." These are stylistically quite different
from the megaliths seen on the continent and in the British Isles.  They
consist of a sort of oval or rectangular column with a rectangular stone lain
on top.  The taulas are almost all oriented to face south, which indicates that
they had a clear astronomical connection.  What the precise connection was is
unknown, but one intriguing theory is that around the time they were
constructed, at this latitude the stars Alpha and Beta Centauri and the stars
of the southern cross were just becoming visible due to the precession of the
equinoxes.  These stars are all very bright, Alpha Centauri is the third
brightest star in the night sky, and they form a fairly compact and
eye-catching cluster.  The people of Menorca may have noticed the emergence of
this new cluster of bright stars appearing low on the southern horizon and
oriented their megaliths towards these new stars.

But again, as with all these Neolithic cultures, all we can say for certain is
that they must have constructed these megaliths with an eye towards the heavens
because the orientations are much too frequent and much too precise to have
been due to chance.  But trying to interpret the meaning behind these
orientations is a highly speculative enterprise with the archaeological
evidence we have available.

Well, with that we will leave Europe behind us for some time and next month
turn to the astronomy of sub-Saharan Africa.  I hope you'll join me then.
Until the next full moon, good night, and clear skies.

## Additional references
  
* Brennan, The Stars and the Stones
* Belmonte, Ancient Astronomy
* Kelley, Exploring Ancient Skies
* Magli, Archaeoastronomy
* Frank, "Hunting the European Sky Bears"

