---
categories: episode
date: '2023-03-10'
description: '"In this episode we examine the work of two Roman astrologers to see
  how Roman astrology worked in practice: Marcus Manilius, who wrote Astronomica,
  and Firmicus Maternus, who wrote the Matheseos."'
keywords:
- astronomy
- astrology
- history
- rome
layout: episode
number: 27
title: Astronomica
---

## Transcript

Good evening, and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon.  My
name is Joe Antognini.

Last month we got a taste of the rather extensive political dimensions of
astrology in ancient Rome.  But the episode was focused mostly on why astrology
was so influential in Rome and how the state tried to regulate this influence.
But I had little to say on what the astrology of ancient Rome actually
consisted of.  In this month's episode I'm going to try to remedy that by
talking about one of the earlier and more complete descriptions of Roman
astrology that comes to us through a work by a first century astrologer named
Marcus Manilius entitled Astronomica.

Now, I normally like to start these kinds of discussions by putting the person
first and saying a little bit about their life.  But in this case it's very
hard to do because as with so many figures from the ancient world we know
basically nothing about Manilius's life.  The only thing that survives of him
is just this work.  No other Roman author even so much as mentions him.  The
only way we can even date the work is thanks to a couple of references to
contemporary events that Manilius makes in the Astronomica.  The most important
one is a reference to the Battle of Teutoberg Forest of 9 AD.  This was a
catastrophic defeat for the Roman Army in which three full legions were
ambushed and slaughtered by a coalition of Germanic tribes, and it's hard to
overstate the effect of this defeat on the Roman psyche.  It was not only an
enormous loss in terms of the sheer number of soldiers lost, but to the proud
Romans it was a humiliating defeat as well, and it shattered the Roman's sense
of invincibility and set the northern bound of the Roman empire at the Rhine.
At any rate, some small sense of the impact of this event in Rome can be seen
by the mere fact that it's referenced in a work on astrology.  But for our
purposes the main importance of Manilius mentioning the Battle of Teutoberg is
that we can be sure that the work must have been written sometime after 9 AD.

The second reference in the work that helps us to date it is a reference to the
emperor.  Unfortunately the emperor is simply referred to as "Caesar," which is
what all emperors were called in Rome, and so on its own isn't especially
helpful.  But from the surrounding context it is probably referring to
Augustus.  Since Augustus died in 16 AD, the work is usually dated to sometime
in the second decade of the first century.  But it's also possible that
Manilius wrote the text after Augustus had died and was simply referring to the
deceased emperor, or possibly that he was referring to his successor Tiberius.

So that is really all we can say with some certainty about Manilius's
biography.  There is even some dispute as to whether or not Manilius was
actually Roman at all.  Historians have periodically suggested that he was
perhaps an educated Greek slave.  The main motivation for this theory is that
over the centuries literary critics have generally derided the quality of
Manilius's poetry, and this led to the supposition that perhaps his poetry was
so bad because Latin was not his native tongue.  And furthermore, despite my
earlier assertion that no other Roman authors mention Manilius, there is in
fact one passing reference by Pliny the Elder to an individual that might have
been Manilius.  Pliny was writing a kind of encyclopedia called the Natural
History in the mid first century AD, and in this work he was talking about
chalk, and in particular he went into the details about the kind of chalk that
was used to color the feet of slaves when they went up for sale.  In this
discussion he mentions one such slave, named "Mannilius Antiochus" who he says
is an astrological writer.  But Pliny states that this individual was active in
the mid first century BC, which is far too early since we know from the
reference to the Battle of Teutoberg Forest that Manilius must have been
writing after 9 AD.  It's possible that Pliny was just way off on when he
thought Manilius was kicking around, but given that the Astronomica had only
been written about 40 or 50 years earlier, it seems like a big mistake to make.
It would be like someone today talking about how Steven Hawking was thinking
about black holes in the 1890s.  So the most probable interpretation is that
there were just two astrologers over the years in Rome who both happened to
have the name "Manilius."

So, there's not much hard evidence to support the idea that Manilius was in
fact a Greek slave.  And on the other side, there are a few aspects of his
writing which seem to support the idea that he was a native-born Roman.  While
it's true that Manilius had his fair share of critics, there have also been
defenders of his poetic style.  His Latin might be a little inelegant, sure,
but it's oftentimes complex, which you might not necessarily expect of a
non-native speaker.  And more importantly, the overall viewpoint he presents in
the text is very Roman-centric.  He talks of himself as being the first to
write about this "foreign" subject of astrology, which seems to imply that he
is the first Roman to do so.  He refers to Latin as "our" language, calls Rome,
"the greatest of all things," and generally shows a lot of rah-rah Roman pride.
He identifies the constellation Libra as the symbol of Rome because it
represents justice and empire.  And when he talks about the Milky Way he says
that the multitude of stars it contains are the souls of great men who have
ascended to the heavens.  He acknowledges that, yes, of course there are men of
all nationalities up there, but most of them are Romans.

Now, as I mentioned earlier, other than that one dubious reference by Pliny,
Manilius's name appears nowhere in the ancient literature.  The Astronomica
just stands alone as a completely independent work.  So, for this reason, it's
hard to say whether or not the Astronomica is the best exemplar of first
century Roman astrology.  At least from what we have, it seems as though this
work had no impact whatsoever and was totally ignored by the author's
contemporaries and all the rest of the Romans down the ages.  Now, it's
possible that this is not true --- perhaps many people read it and just never
felt the need to cite it explicitly.  Or maybe some people did, but their works
were lost.  As with so many things in the ancient world it is hard to say.  But
at least as a point of comparison we can look back to the poem Phaenomena of
Aratus that I mentioned back in Episode 16.  We know that this work was
enormously popular because it was widely referenced throughout the Hellenistic
and Roman world, and some of these references state that it was actually used
as an astronomy textbook for schoolchildren.  But nothing of the sort exists
for the Astronomica of Marcus Manilius, so it's very hard to say how well
received this work was, except that we can be pretty sure it wasn't a
blockbuster in the same way that Aratus's Phaenomena was.

Because it seems to have been a fairly obscure work, its textual history is a
bit interesting.  It seems to have survived in various monasteries over the
centuries and went unnoticed until 1417, when an Italian scholar named Poggio
Bracciolini found it in some library or other, either in France, Germany, or
Switzerland, he didn't say.  Bracciolini couldn't take the original back home
to Italy with him of course, that was out of the question, so he hired a scribe
to make a copy of the document.  But he seems to have done a poor job choosing
his scribe because the copy his scribe made was terrible, riddled with errors,
and he complained that his scribe was "ignornantissimus omnium viventium," the
most ignorant of all the living.  Well, even after its discovery in the 15th
century, the text was still basically ignored until the early 20th century when
the great classicist A.E. Housman devoted much of his scholarly life to
translating and annotating the text.  Housman's decision to expend so much
effort on this one text bewildered his fellow scholars, and the bewilderment
continues right down to this day.  In his time, Housman was considered to be
one of the most knowledgeable classicists of all time, a true giant in the
field.  Now, the Astronomica is an okay work and all, but let's face it, Greek
and Roman literature have a lot more to offer.  So seeing this great figure
spend so much of his life on such a middling work has long been a
disappointment to classicists.  To make a perhaps unfair analogy it would be a
little as though the young Jimi Hendrix, rather than picking up the guitar,
decided to spend his life learning to play the kazoo.  I'm sure he would have
been a great kazoo player, but the rest of the world would have wondered what
could have been if he had chosen an instrument worthier of his talent.

Okay, so that's the little we know about the man who wrote the text and how we
came to be aware of it.  So let's turn now to the text itself.  One thing to
mention right off the bat is the title of the work, "Astronomica."  In modern
terms the text is about astrology, but in the ancient world, there was no real
distinction between the terms astrology and astronomy.  The ancient Greeks and
Romans did recognize a distinction in the subject matter between what we today
call astronomy and astrology --- Ptolemy, for example devoted his Almagest to
astronomy and put his astrological material in the Tetrabiblos.  But there
weren't separate terms used to label these two subjects.  Ancient authors used
the terms astronomia and astrologia more or less interchangeably to refer to
the generic study of the stars.  If one were to force a distinction, astrologia
was perhaps the more general term whereas astronomia was associated more with
Plato and his school and could be more esoteric.  So, although from a modern
perspective a book entitled Astronomica would purport to be about astronomy, it
was a largely astrological work.

Manilius divided the Astronomica into five books.  At a high level, the first
book presents a description of the universe, and especially describes the
constellations.  The second and third books focus on the zodiac, the band of
constellations along the ecliptic, the path of the Sun in the sky.  These first
three books form the astronomical foundation.  The fourth book then dives into
the real meat of the astrology and describes the influence of the zodiac on
Earth.  The fifth book then presents some cutting edge astrological research
and talks about the influence of constellations that are not in the zodiac on
the Earth.

Astronomica shares a common feature of other treatises on astrology from the
era and opens with a defense of the value of the study of astrology.  Manilius
opens by saying:

> By song I undertake to draw down from heaven the divine arts and the stars,
> knowledgeable of fate, which govern the diverse fortunes of men, a work of
> divine reason.

Now as I mentioned earlier, while the ancient Greeks and Romans didn't use
different terms to distinguish astronomy and astrology, they recognized that
the two were distinct subjects, and Manilius argues that astronomy is a
beautiful subject, but nevertheless it is only the foundation of a much more
beautiful subject, namely astrology, to use the modern terms.  Of astronomy he
says:

> It is pleasing to walk through the air itself and live strolling in the
> immense sky and to learn about the constellations and the contrary movements
> of the planets.

But then goes on to say:
  
> It is more pleasing to know in depth the very heart of the universe and to
> see how it governs and brings forth living beings by means of its signs and
> to speak of it in verse, with Phoebus providing the tune.

In other words, astronomy is wonderful and all, but in the end astrology is the
higher subject.  Nevertheless, Manilius cautions the reader that it is
necessary to learn the foundations of astronomy before proceeding to astrology:

> And since the song descends from high heaven and the fixed order of fate
> comes to Earth, I first must sing of the shape of nature and fashion the
> image of the entire universe.

And so he spends the first book doing just that.  Now, nothing in his overview
of the fundamentals of astronomy will be especially novel to us now that we are
intimately familiar with ancient Greek astronomy, but it is a good summary of
what we might call the standard model of the universe in ancient Greece and
Rome that educated people all more or less had in their heads.  The model is
basically the same one that Aristotle had proposed three centuries earlier with
a few modifications.  The universe consists of two spheres: a hollow outer
sphere made of fire, which constituted the heavens, and an solid inner sphere
made of Earth which constituted, you guessed it, the Earth.  Manilius even
rehearses the usual arguments for the roundness of the Earth.  He makes the
philosophical argument that the sphere is the most divine shape, and therefore
most worthy of the universe.  And he answers the objection about why the Earth
does not fall down by reviving Anaximander's argument from five centuries
earlier that the Earth does not fall due to symmetry --- it is equidistant from
all other points in the universe so it cannot chose a direction to move.  Then
he goes on to the empirical arguments with varying degrees of success.  He
makes the point that if the Earth were flat, we would be able to see all the
constellations at once, but some constellations are only visible in summer, and
others are only visible in winter.  So far so good.  Then he brings up lunar
eclipses as another argument for the Earth being round, but unfortunately here
he mangles the argument.  Manilius says that we can tell that the Earth is
round because lunar eclipses are not visible everywhere on Earth.  But in fact,
lunar eclipses are visible everywhere on Earth, at least everywhere that it is
night, and either way this doesn't really have any bearing on whether or not
the Earth is round.  The real argument is that the shadow the Earth casts on
the moon is always curved no matter where on the sky the eclipse occurs.  But
Manilius seems to have not understood this argument.  As an aside, Manilius
also makes a number of other rather basic errors about astronomy in the work
which has led to some speculation that he may not have primarily been an
astrologer but was first and foremost a poet who happened to be somewhat
learned on matters of astrology, somewhat like Aratus.

Now Manilius does not give any indication as to the size of the universe, but
he does point out that the distance from the Earth to the heavens is equal to
the length of two signs of the zodiac.  Since each sign is 30 degrees across,
this means that he has effectively set pi to be exactly 3.  A.E. Housman
commented with sarcasm that "the brightest facet of Manilius's genius is his
eminent aptitude for doing sums in verse."

Now one of the interesting bits of his overall description of the universe is
how he treats the creation of the universe.  The earlier philosophers of the
Ionian school had some theories about how the universe came to be, and Plato
said a great deal about it in the Timaeus.  But the Greeks didn't really have a
consensus view on the creation of the universe.  If we look at their myths, the
creation myth is fairly vague relative to other cultures --- certainly compared
to the creation story of the ancient Israelites to the east.  In Hesiod's
telling, there is this idea that in the beginning was a primordial god called
Chaos.  Then Gaea the Earth, Tartarus the Underworld, and Eros, Love, came into
being.  But it's not really clear whether or not these deities spring from
Chaos directly or just came into being independently.  At any rate, the myth more or
less just lists which gods or goddesses sprang from which others and the
stories don't really get going until you get to the Titanomachy, when the
Olympians rebelled against their elders, the Titans.  With the exception of
this brief story from Hesiod about Chaos, the Greek myths essentially take the
existence of the universe for granted.  So Manilius looks at the paucity of
thought on the subject and the diversity of those few theories that do exist
and concludes that we really don't know anything about the topic.  Today we
might commend him for his intellectual modesty.  He says:

> The origin of the universe will always be a matter of controversy, and
> doubtful will remain that which is hidden and is so far beyond man and god.

This is particularly interesting because to Manilius, the creation of the
universe is not only beyond human understanding, but is beyond the
understanding of the gods as well.  Whoever created it, though, was evidently
an extraordinary artist.  As an another aside here, the Roman author Varro
argued that the Latin word for heaven, "caelum" was derived from "caelatum,"
which meant "engraving" as though the creator of the universe had engraved the
stars by hand onto the sky.  Nevertheless, however it got here, Manilius falls
over himself to praise at length the rationality and elegance of its structure.  

And here, I think it's worth pausing a moment and trying to get inside the
mindset of those in the ancient world.  In the modern world, we're very
familiar with clockwork machines and we have all grown up at least implicitly
with a highly mechanistic worldview.  Whether or not we have learned much
physics, we learn, at least through osmosis in the culture a picture of the
universe that is deterministic.  The laws of physics rule all and
mechanistically drive all matter in the universe forward in time.  But the
ancients had no such conception.  Their world was a world of patterns, but not
absolutely repeating patterns.  They could note the pattern of winter followed
by spring and spring followed by summer, but each summer differed somewhat from
the summer that came before and the summer that came afterwards.  Everyone had
the same phases of life from childhood to old age, but no child was identical
to another.  But the heavens were the one exception in all this, and this was
of considerable note to the ancients.  Everything on Earth changes --- no
pattern repeats itself precisely.  But in the heavens, the same stars rise
every night in precisely the same configurations.  The same stars are visible
in summertime year after year after year.  They knew of nothing else in their
life that had the same precise regularity.  Now, the modern view is to take
this regularity as the default --- if things are behaving randomly, the impulse
is to investigate and see what is causing two things to be different.  This is,
in a nutshell, the whole scientific method.  You take a system and hold
everything you can constant while you try to change just one parameter to see
how that affects its behavior.  But to the ancients, variation was the norm.
Regularity was the exception.  And it was a mystery.  Manilius writes:

> But why do we observe the constellations rise in an appointed rhythm and run
> their prescribed course as if by command, without any racing ahead or being
> left behind?  Why do always the same stars adorn the summer nights and the
> same the winter nights, and why does each day impart to the sky a specific
> appearance at both its arrival and its departure?

Manilius proclaims how remarkable it is that the description of the skies in
Homer centuries in the past matches the sky he observes today.

> All things created according to mortal law are changing and with the years
> turning, the lands do not know that they take off and put on new appearances
> through the ages.  But heaven remains unchanged and preserves all its
> characteristics; long time does not increase it and age not diminish it, and
> its movement affects it in no way, nor does its course wear it out.  It will
> always be the same because it always was the same.  Our fathers saw it no
> different, nor will our grandsons.

Manilius then starts to describe the various constellations of the sky.  Since
his main aim is astrological he starts with the zodiac, beginning with Aries at
the vernal equinox.  Then after finishing up with the zodiac he describes the
circumpolar constellations and in particular notes how Greek sailors use the
Great Bear to navigate whereas Phoenicians use the Little Bear.  Then he
describes the rest of the northern constellations followed by the southern
constellations that are visible from Rome.  But Manilius recognizes that this
does not cover the whole celestial sphere --- there are regions of the sky
which he is too far north to see, so he speculates about what some of these
unseen stars very far south might look like.  His sense of symmetry and
intuition that the universe has been rationally constructed leads him to the
conclusion that probably there is a Great Bear and a Little Bear around the
southern celestial pole just as there are around the northern celestial pole,
along with a southern analog of Draco.

As he's going through all these constellations, much like Aratus did earlier in
his Phaenomena, Manilius entertains his reader by regaling them with all the
mythical stories associated with each of the constellations.  But in the end,
Manilius advises his readers not to put too much stock in the truth of such
stories and to beware so-called astronomers who have nothing to tell you about
the sky but amusing stories.

Now, one feature of the constellations that annoys many of us today is that the
constellations purport to be various things, a ram, a bull, a hunter, a dog,
and so forth, but when you look at them, they don't really look like anything
of the sort.  How can you tell that that's what they're supposed to be?  Well
Manilius answers this question for you.  In his telling, they necessarily have
to be mere outlines of the figures they are meant to represent, because if they
were filled in with stars, there would be so many stars that the whole sky
would ignite.  But if you're having difficulty recognizing the shapes, Manilius
recommends that you look at the constellations when the Moon is full since it
will wash out the fainter stars and make the bright stars stand out more.
Having been in a very dark site myself, this is good advice for the ancient
world, but it unfortunately won't work for most of us today because the main
problem we now have is that the sky is so bright in populated places that many
of the constellations cannot be seen at all.

Well, after laying out the constellations arrayed across the heavens he then
spends quite a bit of time describing the various astronomical circles, the
celestial equator, the tropics, the zodiac, and so forth, along with the Milky
Way, and once Manilius has laid the astronomical foundations he's ready to dive
into astrology proper.  Now I've already said a fair amount about the different
categories of astrology in previous episodes.  In the last episode I talked
about the tension between fatalistic and catarchic astrology, fatalistic
astrology being the more extreme interpretation of the two in which the omens
written in the stars are unalterable.  Catarchic astrology, by contrast, only
claims that the stars have a general influence on the Earth, but this influence
can be overcome.  For his part, Manilius comes down squarely on the side of
fatalistic astrology.  The most famous line from the book is the Latin motto
"fata regunt orbem, certa stant omnia lege," which translates to "fate rules
the universe --- on immutable law, everything rests."  One thing I should have
mentioned in the last episode, however, is that the term catarchic astrology
has a dual meaning, it can also be the use of astrology to make predictions
about when is the optimal time to do something.  But this term was generalized
to mean the general attitude that the predictions of the stars were not
absolute since the only reason you would determine the optimal time to do
something is to change your own behavior, which would be impossible if
everything was completely predetermined.  Besides catarchic predictions, the
other main use case of astrology was what is called either natal astrology or
genethiliacal astrology if you aren't into the whole brevity thing, and this is
the practice of reading the horoscope of an individual's birth to determine the
main features of their life.

Aside from the fatalistic-catarchic distinction, another big fault line in
astrology that I have discussed was what is called mundane vs. individual
astrology.  Mundane astrology has to do with reading the heavens to determine
great things, the fates of kings and nations, the coming of wars and plagues,
and so forth, and calling this mundane might sound like something of an
oxymoron but it derives from the Latin "mundus" meaning "world".  By contrast
individual astrology is, as you would expect, all about predicting the events
of an individual's life.  Of the two Manilius is only really interested in
individual astrology.  He has about 250 lines devoted to astrological geography
in which he argues that the animosities and alliances among the zodiacal signs
are paralleled on Earth by the animosities and alliances among the people down
below.  But even that is laid out for the purpose of reading an individual's
horoscope since the location of a person's birth will influence the reading of
the stars.

But there was another general aspect of ancient astrology that I have not
mentioned, and this was a theory of how astrology actually worked.  The whole
idea of the field is to observe the heavens and use these observations to make
predictions about life here on Earth.  Now we, today, at least those of us of a
scientific bent, find astrology a little absurd because the stars are so far
away --- how can they possibly have any influence on us?  We envision the
direction of causality as going from the stars to us.  But this was not
Manilius's view.  To him, and, really, to many ancient astrologers, the heavens
did not directly cause anything on Earth --- instead they were simply *signs*
of what happened on Earth.  To put it in more formal modern language, if we see
that thing A is correlated with thing B, there are three possibilities.  In the
simplest cases we could have that A causes B or B causes A.  But there is a
third possibility, that there is some other thing C which causes both A and B.
So we could have that the heavens cause things to happen on the Earth, or we
could have that things on Earth cause things to happen in the heavens, though
that possibility was universally rejected, but it could be that there is some
other thing that causes both things to happen on Earth and things to happen in
the heavens.  This was the position of Manilius.  Now, what this other thing
was was always a little vague.  He more or less chalked it up to divine
providence and a belief in a general "sympathy" that pervaded the universe and
caused all things to move in harmony with each other.  Now this theory was not
universally accepted.  Ptolemy for his part a few centuries later took the more
materialistic position and supposed that the stars directly caused events here
on Earth.

Manilius's picture of life on Earth paralleling the heavens can be seen in his
discussion of stellar brightnesses.  He notes that the stars are of all
different brightnesses, and there are more and more stars at fainter and
fainter magnitudes.  In his telling, the faintest stars are as numerous as the
grains of sand on the Earth or the leaves falling in the forest, and he
analogizes this distribution to human society.  Just as there are a multitude
of faint stars, then a smaller number of stars of moderate magnitude, and only
a handful of very bright stars, so it is in our society.  There is the vast
unwashed mass of those without citizenship, then there is the smaller number of
common citizens, then you have yet fewer equestrians, and finally, there are
are only very few senators.  Reading between the lines here, Manilius makes an
interesting omission.  He ends his hierarchy with the senators --- but he was
writing this toward the end of Augustus's rule --- so where is the emperor?
Scholars have wondered whether Manilius was perhaps making a subtle republican
point here.  But it is a little hard to read too much into it because in the
early empire, Rome operated under the fiction that the emperor was simply the
first among equals.

At any rate, as part of his defense of astrology Manilius presents a kind of
history of the subject.  The most important thing Manilius wants you to know
about it is that it is very ancient and ultimately came from the god Mercury.
From Mercury, it was revealed by the gods to kings.  And as an aside here, this
was very much in line with the ancient worldview.  Kings were the closest to
the gods, just a hair below them.  And in many cases kings were in fact
promoted to divinity.  So this view that the knowledge of astrology came to man
from the gods through kings made perfect sense.  From the kings it was passed
on to the priests who then had been practicing the art since time immemorial.
Critically, they had been doing this for so long that an entire Great Year had
passed, a Great Year being the time it takes the Sun, Moon, and all the planets
to return to their initial configurations.  What exactly the length of the
Great Year was varied from astronomer to astronomer, some pegged it at a few
thousand years others went as high as a few million.  But either way, the
important thing was that astrologers had been observing the sky that entire
time, so that today, no sky is unique.  It had been observed before and earlier
astrologers had seen the consequences on Earth.  This was why you could have
absolute faith in the practice of astrology.  It may be a difficult subject to
do properly, but it was tried and tested and there was nothing new under the
Sun.

Okay, so with that all out of the way, Manilius starts to get into some of the
mechanics of his astrology.  If you were to read a horoscope, what you would do
is draw a large circle which is the stage on which everything happens and
represents the position of the zodiac on the sky at the time of an individual's
birth.  On the left hand side of the circle is a point called the ascendant,
which represented the eastern horizon, so this would tell you what sign was
rising at the time of someone's birth.  This was generally the most important
point and drove the entire astrological analysis.  In Greek the term for this
point was "horoscopus," which is how we get the more general term "horoscope".
At the top of the circle you have a point called midheaven which represents the
point on the zodiac that is highest on the sky.  Then to the right you have the
descendent, which tells you which sign is setting, and finally at the bottom of
the circle is a point called lower midheaven, which is opposite the highest
point of the zodiac and is under your feet, and so is not visible.
Collectively, these four points are called the "cardines."

There are then three ways to analyze an individual's horoscope.  First, you can
look at what signs the various planets are in.  Then second, you can look at
where the signs of the zodiac are relative to the cardines.  And, in fact,
Manilius divides it up further, each quarter of the circle gets divided into
three slices so that there are twelve divisions to the circle in all, called
"places" or "houses."  Now one subtlety here is that this was an equal division
of the circle in the diagram, but it wasn't actually an equal division on the
sky.  Because the zodiac is inclined on the sky, the angles subtended by each
of the houses varied over the course of the year.  During winter when the
zodiac is high on the sky, the width of the houses above the horizon was
larger, and in summer when the zodiac is low it was smaller.

This division was known as the dodecatropos, and each one corresponded to a
different aspect of a person's life: health, marriage, children, parents, death
and so forth.  So you had these two configurations that the astrologer had to
keep track of: which planets were in which signs, and which signs were in which
houses.  But there was a third configuration, too, and this was what was called
the system of Lots.  Now the system of lots appears in other astrological
expositions, but Manilius's method is unique.  Like the system of houses, the
system of lots divides the circle of the zodiac into twelve equal slices.  But
now, rather than setting them based on the horizon, they are variable and are
set based on the position of the Sun and Moon.  The procedure Manilius says is
that if the individual was born during the day, find the angle from the Sun to
the Moon, moving counter-clockwise.  Then, starting at the ascendant, go that
number of degrees above the ascendant.  But if it is night, however, you use
the angle from the Moon to the Sun rather than Sun to the Moon.  This sets the
position of the first lot.  Then the rest of the lots increment
counter-clockwise around the zodiac.  As with the houses, each lot corresponds
to some aspect of life.  In Manilius's system, for example, the first lot tells
you about wealth, the second about warfare and travel, the fifth about marriage
and friendship, the eleventh about health, and so on.

These three sets of configurations produced a huge combination of possibilities
that the astrologer could analyze.  But in order to do this, of course, one
needs to know what the sky looked like at the time of a person's birth.  Now,
the simplest method is to assume that a new sign rises every two hours.  Based
on the day of the year and the time of the birth, you could then fairly easily
figure out which sign was where.  This is the so-called "common method," but
Manilius advises you not to use it.  The problem is that the signs do not rise
exactly every two hours.  Because the zodiac is inclined on the sky, some of
the signs rise more quickly and others more slowly.  But figuring out how to do
this correctly is quite complicated, so Manilius conveniently provides an
alternative method: just assume that half a sign rises every hour.  Now if you
think about it, this is exactly the same as assuming that a whole sign rises
every two hours which Manilius just told you not to do.  Housman, in his usual
acerbic style, says:

> Alas, alas!  This alternative method of yours, my poor Marcus, is none other
> than the vulgar method which ... you said you knew, and which ...  you
> exposed as false.  The wolf, to whom in his proper shape you denied
> admittance, has come back disguised as your mother the goose, and her gosling
> has opened the door to him.

To understand the significance of each sign in a particular house or lot,
Manilius describes the qualities of the various signs of the zodiac.  Once
again, there is a huge number of attributes that each sign carries.  Signs can
be masculine or feminine, animal or human, fertile or infertile, terrestrial or
aquatic.  Mostly you could guess these attributes, but not all.  Taurus the
Bull, for instance is considered a feminine sign.  Virgo is considered to be
infertile.  Some are single, others double.  If you look at the constellations,
Taurus, Gemini, and Cancer they all appear to be looking backward from the
direction they travel on the heavens, and this is naturally significant as
well.  These attributes then produce relationships between them.  The animal
signs and human signs are generally opposed to one another.  Some of the
masculine signs are in love with various feminine signs, but sadly this
celestial romance is unrequited.

In Manilius's telling, the zodiac is a loud, quarrelsome place, with the
various signs antagonizing each other.  The strongest enmities are between
signs on opposite sides of the zodiac to each other.  These signs could never
share the same sky --- as one rose another would set, as though they could not
even stand the sight of each other.

But there were sympathies between some of the signs as well.  The strongest of
these is the trigon, or a set of three signs that form an equilateral triangle.
Manilius claims that the trigon has the greatest influence because the path
connecting the signs comes the closest to Earth.  Next is the quartile, which
are the signs that form a square together, and finally, sextiles, which are
signs that form a hexagon together and which have the weakest influence.

Each of the signs has their own professional associations.  For example, Leo,
being a lion, is most relevant to hunters and butchers.  Aries is most relevant
to wool workers.  Taurus to farmers.  Pisces is most relevant to fishers,
sailors, and shipbuilders, and Scorpio is associated with soldiers and
gladiators.  Gemini gets associated with poets and astrologers, which might
seem a little out of left field, but one of the interpretations of Gemini was
that the twins represented Apollo and Mercury, the gods of poetry and astrology
respectively.

Manilius then divides each sign into three sections 10 degrees wide, called
dodecani.  I mentioned these in the last episode and they seem to have been due
to Egyptian influence since the Egyptians had 36 zodiacal signs rather than the
12 of Babylonian and Greek astronomy.  Each sign was also divided into 12
segments of 2.5 degrees called dodecatemoria.  Each one of these 12
dodecatemoria in a sign was in turn associated with its own subsign.  Some of
these were "partes damnande" in Manilius's terminology and would negate or
impair the usual effect of the overall sign.  Since there are 144 dodecatemoria
in all, this part of the poem where Manilius explains which ones are good and
which ones are bad is a bit monotonous.  Finally, each dodecatemorius is
divided into five half degree segments, each of which is, in turn, associated
with a planet.  Needless to say, this is a complicated system and Manilius
admits that he can only give a cursory treatment.  But, never fear, he says he
will give a complete exposition in the future.  But, if he ever did, it's not
in the Astronomica.

There are other details that the astrologer must consider as well: a lunar
eclipse would have the effect of cancelling out the sign that the eclipse
occurred in.  And this was not limited to the duration of the eclipse, the
effect would persist for about a year, and then would pass on to the two
preceding signs which would then weaken.  Finally, in his last book Manilius
delves into the cutting edge astrological research of the day, the effect of
the so-called paranatellonta.  These were the constellations outside of the
zodiac.  Ordinary astrology was exclusively concerned with the constellations
of the zodiac.  The rest of the sky might as well not exist.  But the thought
was that there might be some additional astrological signal by considering
which non-zodiacal constellations were rising at the time of an individual's
birth.  Here Manilius gives quite a complete tour through much of the sky and
enumerates the associations of 33 constellations.  Canis minor, for instance,
the little dog, is associated with dog breeders, Argo, the ship, is associated
with sailors, Auriga the Charioteer, is associated with, charioteers.
Ophiuchus the snake handler is associated with, you guessed it, snake handlers.
And Manilius doesn't just rattle these associations off, he describes each of
these professions in quite some detail, so this section is actually quite a
charming window into everyday life in ancient Rome.  Manilius's discussion of
Cetus the whale, for instance, includes 14 lines on the subject of the various
ways that fish sauce can be made.

Well that is pretty much it in the Astronomica.  Now let's say you decide to go
and use what you have learned from this work to cast a few horoscopes yourself.
You'll immediately hit a difficulty.  Manilius describes all the aspects of the
zodiac in thorough detail --- but how do you know which signs are relevant
when?  You're supposed to look at which planets are in which signs.  But what
do the different planets mean?  Thinking back, I never really talked about the
planets at all.  In the entire Astronomica, Manilius devotes just about four
lines to describing the planets.  But of course the interaction of the planets
with the zodiac is the most important part of the whole thing!  This has always
been the most baffling feature of the Astronomica.  Katharina Volk described
the astrology Manilius tells you in the Astronomica as "like a gameboard
without pieces, a football field without players or a ball."  To take the
analogy a bit further, if you're familiar with the board game the Settlers of
Catan, it's rather as though Manilius told you all about the various kinds of
hexagonal tiles, the wheat, the ore, the clay, the desert and so forth, but
then never told you anything at all about the game pieces, the villages, the
roads, and the cities.  You'd know a fair amount the board game, but you
certainly wouldn't be able to play.  And as an aside here, this analogy to a
game board really isn't so far off because the way that ancient astrologers
would often conduct their sessions was with the aid of a large board that would
represent the zodiac.  Then the astrologer would place gemstones at various
points on the board to represent the positions of the planets to explain
different aspects of the horoscope.  But the entire Astronomica is essentially
devoted to just describing the board itself and says nothing about the
placement of the gems.

So why is there this glaring omission?  There are a couple of possibilities.
One is that he did in fact include it, but that part of the work got lost.  The
main difficulty with this explanation is that it's hard to point to where in
the text a section went missing.  There are a few places where there seems to
be some missing text because a line gets cut off or the text suddenly jumps
from one subject to another.  But if Manilius did give a decent treatment of
the planets, it would have to have been very long because that was really at
the core of astrological theory, and nowhere in the text do these gaps between
subjects seem large enough to accommodate a topic like that.  Another option is
that maybe it came at the end as a sixth book which got lost, or that the
Manilius intended to put his discussion of the planets at the end, but just
never got around to it and left the work unfinished.  But the book has a fairly
logical progression and the conclusion seems polished so it doesn't seem as
though the book suddenly ended halfway through.  Another alternative is that,
despite his promises at the beginning of the work, Manilius may not have wanted
to give too much detail about how astrology actually worked in practice,
certainly not enough for the reader to actually go out and cast their own
horoscopes.  After all, he was writing this work in the second decade AD, and
you'll recall from last episode that this would have been after Augustus's
edict of 11 AD which put severe restrictions on the practice of astrology.
Given the risky subject matter he was dealing with, he may have decided to
withhold the more sensitive technical details about how to use the planets to
interpret a horoscope and presented only the more poetic descriptions of the
various features of the zodiac and celestial sphere.  Or, perhaps he was first
and foremost a poet rather than an astrologer and found the descriptions of the
zodiacal constellations more amenable to verse than the motions of the planets.

Well, before we forever abandon the wasteland that is Roman astronomy, I would
be remiss if I did not mention one last Roman astrologer, a man by the name of
Firmicus Maternus.  Firmicus was a Roman senator from Sicily who was active in
the first half of the 4th century AD.  He pursued law when he came of age and
spent the early part of his career battling organized criminal networks in
Sicily.  Evidently the Sicilian Mafia was just as much a problem in late
antiquity as it is today.  In midlife he was promoted to the rank of senator
and befriended Lollianus Mavortius who was a consul and former governor, and it
seems that the two connected over a mutual interest in astrology.  Firmicus
must have been the more learned of the two on the subject and decided to write
an exposition of astrology for his friend.  The resulting text, called the
Matheseos, is the longest surviving astrological text in Latin.  Later in life
Firmicus wrote a second text, called "On the Error of Profane Religions," which
was a defense of Christianity, a religion that was fast becoming popular among
upper class Romans after Constantine began to publicly embrace it earlier in
the century.  Firmicus probably converted to Christianity later in life, after
having written the Matheseos, but we cannot say with certainty, which is
unfortunate because otherwise Firmicus would have been a very interesting data
point on the relationship between early Christianity and astrology.  If he was
a lifelong Christian, presumably he believed that astrology was compatible with
Christianity.  But if he converted later in life, as is more probable, did he
reject the astrology he had practiced in his youth?  Sadly we don't know.

Either way, the astrology presented in the Matheseos is highly influenced by
Stoicism and Firmicus is firmly in the camp of fatalistic astrology.  To him,
only fatalistic astrology could explain the otherwise inexplicable twists and
turns that we see in our own and others' lives.  He writes:

> Consider the youth at the height of his physical development – rich,
> innocent, modest. Driven by no private crime, by no anxiety, he has hanged
> himself... Another man, known to everyone as innocent, fell on a drawn
> sword... A just man maintains his life as a wretched beggar while another,
> stained by well known crimes, accumulates the highest honours... To what do
> we attribute all this?.... Give us your hand for a little while and hold back
> from arguments. Soon you may agree that all that stumbling and weak mortality
> must bear are decided by the chance movements of the planets.

The eight books of the Matheseos follow a structure that should by now be
fairly familiar to us connoisseurs of ancient astrology.  The first book
presents a defense of the practice and tells you just how powerful it is and
how much you can read of a person's life, if only you take sufficient care to
practice it correctly.  Then Firmicus goes over the fundamentals of astronomy,
the creation of the world, and then he gets to the good stuff that Manilius
left out, how to interpret the planets.  The fourth book is devoted to the
specific topic of how to interpret the position of the Moon.  The fifth book is
largely missing, but by book 6 he has moved on to more advanced topics like how
to interpret combinations of planets like conjunctions, oppositions, trines,
quartiles, and so forth.

For the casual reader the most interesting book is Book 7, which starts to make
specific relations of the configurations of the planets to various
circumstances on Earth.  This, then, is what ties everything together and
places in the reader's hands the power to read the heavens.  But before
granting the reader such power, he impresses upon the reader that they must use
this power responsibly and beseeches the astrologer to take an oath to only use
this power for good, much as the ancient physician Hippocrates urged his
students to recite his own oath.  Firmicus's oath goes as follows:

> We beg you to take an oath that these revered doctrines will not be revealed
> to profane ears but that the entire teaching of divinity will be made known
> only to those equipped with pure splendor of mind, whom an uncorrupted soul
> has led to the right path of life, whose loyalty is above reproach, whose
> hands are free of all crime. Receive, therefore, the detailed account which
> with the greatest trepidation of spirit we have promised you.

I'll pause for a moment now so that you can swear the oath and then we can
proceed. 

Okay, now that we have agreed to use this knowledge for good, what kinds of
things can we predict with Firmicus's astrology?  Now, in the interest of time
I can't go into through each and every category Firmicus presents as there are
twenty-six of them.  But they range from the mundane to the terrifying.  On the
more mundane end he has a formula to predict whether or not an individual will
go bald:

> When the Moon is on the angles and in signs which are without hair or in
> Sagittarius, and the malefic planets are in fixed or tropical signs in the
> house of illnesses and afflictions, the native will be bald. The same is the
> result of Venus in her own house on the midheaven. But Saturn between the Sun
> and Moon will make them gray at an early age.

Firmicus covers numerous illnesses and maladies as well, whether or not an
individual will go blind, suffer from epilepsy, insanity, paralysis, or a
difficult childbirth.  For example:

> If the Sun and Moon are both located on one angle, or on different angles,
> and are in opposition or square aspect, if malefic planets hold both
> anaforas, that is, of the Sun and Moon, this indicates blindness of both
> eyes.

Some of the sections of the seventh book implicitly rebut a number of the
arguments that had been leveled at astrology by its skeptics.  You'll recall
that one of the critiques was that there was no reason that it shouldn't also
apply to animals.  And Firmicus says indeed, why not and has a section on
predicting the fates of animals.  For example:

> If Mars is in opposition or square aspect to the Sun or Moon on the
> ascendant, the quadruped which was born will be destined for public
> sacrifice.

The other main critique was that astrology didn't have a good explanation for
the different fates of twins.  Now, Firmicus doesn't address this conundrum
head on, but he does at least give you some tools to anticipate the problem by
predicting whether or not a pregnancy will result in twins.

In addition to these more prosaic kinds of predictions he has a variety of more
salacious formulae.  Will someone become a homosexual or a prostitute?  Here
you must be careful because different configurations have different
implications for men and women.  A particular configuration may be benign for a
women but will cause a man to inevitably sink into a life of prostitution.
However, a worried parent may at least find a silver lining in that some signs
point to the individual becoming no ordinary prostitute, but one of high
station.  But that's not all, Firmicus tells you how to determine if someone
will be castrated, or publicly engage in sexual perversion, or commit incest.

Many of Firmicus's formulae are darker.  There is quite a long section on
infanticide.  Infanticide was a tragically common practice in ancient Greece
and Rome.  As a general rule infants with any visible deformities would be
abandoned, but any infant could be abandoned for any reason.  A newborn child
would be presented before the family patriarch who had the right to decide
whether to keep the child or not.  Now, the Greeks and Romans didn't think of
themselves as savages --- they thought that murdering the infant directly was
too cruel.  Instead the preferred method of infanticide was through exposure
--- they would simply abandon the child somewhere out in the wilderness.  They
could then rationalize that they had not killed the child themselves.  Indeed,
if the gods willed the child to live, a passerby would come upon him or her and
take the child in --- or they might even be raised by animals as in the myth of
Remus and Romulus.  Since the child had been left alive, this naturally led
many grieving mothers to wonder what had become of their child and to consult
astrologers to find out.  Based on Firmicus's formulae, the prognosis was
generally not good.  Most of the time Firmicus predicts that the infant will
die, oftentimes eaten by dogs, or sometimes drowned.  In one case the infant
will be taken in by a stranger but will nevertheless perish a few days later.

Another gruesome section deals with violent deaths and explains how certain
configurations of the planets indicate that an individual will see a violent
end and that the particular signs these configurations occur in determine the
manner of the death.  If the configuration occurs in a watery sign, for
instance, the hapless individual will die by drowning.  An Earth sign portends
a natural disaster.  If Mars is involved one will die in war or some sort of
fight.  There are methods to predict death by hanging, hemorrhage, or being
devoured by beasts.

All this is certainly part and parcel of ancient astrology.  To broaden the
discussion, one of the general features you find in ancient astrological texts
is that the predictions tended to have a kind of binary quality.  If you went
to an astrologer, you'd be unlikely to hear that you would have a decent
occupation, make enough to get by, have a decent marriage and then die at an
average age.  Instead, you'd either obtain unimaginable wealth or be destined
for penury.  You would live to a ripe old age, honored by all, or you would be
strangled to death and your corpse would be devoured by dogs.  But perhaps it
is unfair to lay this criticism at the feet of the astrologers.  After all,
they were simply providing a service to the people, and what their clients
wanted was to see themselves in a different life, whether for better or worse.
The last thing they wanted to hear was that nothing in their life was ever
going to change.  So, astrologers obliged them and gave them a window into a
different life.

Well, with that we will finally leave Rome behind us and move on to more
astronomically advanced civilizations.  In the next episode, we'll start our
journey through the astronomy of the last major culture of the Mediterranean,
one which has come up in passing again and again over the course of this
podcast --- ancient Egypt.  Relative to the Romans, the Egyptians were a truly
ancient civilization, more than a millennium older to the Romans as the Romans
are to us today.  So next month we'll have to wind the clock back a few
millennia.  I hope you'll join me then.  Until the next full moon, good night
and clear skies.

## Additional references

* Volk, Manilius and his Intellectual Background
* Green & Volk, Forgotten Stars
