---
categories: episode
date: '2023-11-30'
description: In our final episode on ancient Indian astronomy, we tour the five astronomical
  Siddhantas, and then meet some of the astronomers whose names and works survive
  to us, most importantly, the great Aryabhata.
keywords:
- astronomy
- history
layout: episode
number: 36
title: Aryabhata & the Siddhantas
---

## Transcript

Good evening, and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon.  My
name is Joe Antognini.

Well last month we dived into the astronomy of the late Vedic period in India,
which culminated in a text called the Vedanga Jyotisha.  The text itself was
written probably in the middle of the first millennium BC, but many of the
astronomical techniques it presented were probably centuries older than that.
Regardless, the astronomy of the Jyotisha held sway as the state of the art of
Indian astronomy for centuries after it was formalized, well into the first
millennium AD.

Over all these years, however, certain flaws in the Jyotisha came to be harder
to ignore.  Of course, the big one is setting the length of the year to 366
days, but other periods of time were also slightly inaccurate, and over the
years these inaccuracies grew and grew and became more apparent.  Furthermore,
the Jyotisha was also fairly limited in its scope.  It was explicitly written
as an aid in calculating the appropriate times to perform the requisite rituals
in the Vedic calendar, and so it just didn't have anything to say about other
aspects of astronomy like the motion of the planets or how to predict when
eclipses would occur.  It's also in these first few centuries of the first
millennium AD that contact with the west began to expand, and knowledge of new
techniques in the astronomy of Greece and Babylonia starts to reach India.

One of the earliest indications of this change is from the astronomer Vrddha
Garga, who was probably active early in the first century AD around the turn of
the millennium.  Incidentally, this Vrddha Garga is not to be confused with a
sage who composed one of the hymns of the Rigveda and is simply known as Garga.
Vrddha Garga is mostly remembered for a text that is attributed to him, which
is usually called the Gargiya-Jyotisha.  As with the other texts from this era
and earlier, we still can't definitively attribute this work to a single
individual, and it was more likely to have been composed from the writings of a
number of astronomers over several generations and then ascribed to one
individual.  But the book contains several references to the Greeks.  Now,
during the explosive expansion of the Macedonian empire under Alexander the
Great in the late 4th century BC, Alexander famously claimed to have conquered
the known world out to India.  Now, this was perhaps a bit of propaganda.
Alexander made it some of the way into the Indus river valley, and it should be
noted that he made it further than Persia had ever managed.  But it was
nevertheless essentially a toehold on the subcontinent and didn't even reach to
the modern-day borders of India.  But, Alexander's conquests began to
strengthen trade networks between India and the West, and ultimately
facilitated the exchanged of information between east and west.  Well, based on
some of the references to the Greeks in the Gargiya-Jyotisha, it seems that the
invasion of the Greeks was a fresh experience for at least one of the
astronomers who contributed to it.  But Vrddha Garga himself seems to have been
quite admiring of the Greeks, at least scientifically.  He wrote:

> The Greeks are indeed barbarians, but amongst them this science of astronomy
> is well established; therefore even they are honored as rishis [sages].

A more comprehensive piece of evidence for the influence of Greek astronomy on
Indian astronomy came in the next few centuries with a work called the
Yavanajakata.  This was a work that was directly based on a Greek text that
several Indian astronomers translated into Sanskrit and converted into verse.
The original work was probably written in Alexandria in the early 2nd century
AD and was first translated and versified just a few decades later.  The text
is almost entirely astrological and taught the reader how to read horoscopes
since by this point in time, that is what Hellenistic and Roman society was
almost exclusively interested in in their astronomy.  The name itself,
Yavanajakata, comes from the Yavana kingdom, which is also known as the
Indo-Greek kingdom.  This was a kingdom of mostly Greek people in what would
today be modern-day Pakistan.  You may recall from the early episodes on Greece
that Greece underwent a period of expansion, where groups of Greeks would
travel to distant lands and establish colonies there, over time spreading from
the Iberian peninsula in the west all the way out to the Black Sea.  Well, some
of these settlers traveled east to Persia, but the Persian state was generally
not happy to see the growth of foreign settlements in their empire.  So
periodically the Persians would forcibly relocate the Greeks to the eastern
side of their empire.  Eventually, Alexander's conquests extended Greek rule
out to these peripheries and reconnected these Greek settlements to the broader
Hellenistic world.  After Alexander's death, his short lived empire fragmented,
and eventually the Greco-Bactrian kingdom developed out of the eastern portion,
and later on the eastern portion of that developed into the Indo-Greek kingdom,
which lasted from about 200 BC until the turn of the millennium.  But the older
name for this kingdom, the Yavana kingdom, derives from the word "Ionian."

At any rate, despite the fact that modern day Greece and India are really quite
far apart, in Hellenistic times, Greek culture was right at India's doorstep,
so the major influence of Greek astronomy on Indian astronomy is perhaps more
plausible than it might at first glance seem.  Well, as new developments in
astronomy from Greece made their way into India, Indian astronomers could no
longer ignore the shortcomings of the Vedanga Jyotisha.  A few centuries into
the first millennium it was clear that a new approach to astronomy was needed.
So by around the 4th and 5th centuries AD we start to see a new series of works
produced that codified these new developments.  These works are called
"siddhantas."  The term "siddhanta" translates from Sanskrit as something like
"settled doctrine," or "final conclusion," so it was meant to be a kind of
summing up of the centuries of studies on a particular topic.  The siddhantas
as a genre are not exclusively astronomical, in fact, only a few of them deal
with astronomy.  Traditionally there were 18 of these Siddhantas, but as with
the texts of ancient Greece, most of these were lost, and also similar to
ancient Greece, in many cases later authors impersonated the famous sages of
yore who wrote the original texts in order to steal a bit of prestige for their
own works.  Most of the siddhantas deal with topics in theology and philosophy
in Hinduism and Buddhism, but five of them deal with astronomy.

One of the general features of the astronomical siddhantas is that the
astronomy has by this point clearly become more sophisticated, and more than
that, it has become interested in a much wider range of phenomena than the
Jyotisha.  Which, to be fair, was not terribly difficult to do since the
Jyotisha was pretty short and couldn't cover too much material.

The first of these five Siddhantas is called the Paitamaha Siddhanta and isn't
really of too much interest except to show that despite advances in other
astronomical schools, there was still a contingent of astronomers who held to
the ways outlined in the Vedanga Jyotisha.  The astronomy of the
Paitamaha-siddhanta is more or less identical to the astronomy of the Jyotisha
and has the same focus on the calendar and bases its calendrical system on the
same yuga of 5 years.

A kind of intermediate work is the Vasishtha-siddhanta, which was named after
the ancient sage Vasishtha, one of the authors of the Rigveda.  The
Vasishtha-siddhanta has a number of real developments over the Jyotisha, but
compared to the next three siddhantas it's the most inaccurate.  The first
really new feature we see in it reflects the influence of Babylonia and Greece
on Indian astronomy by this point.  The Vasishtha-siddhanta introduces the 12
signs of the zodiac as a way to measure ecliptic longitude, and divides each of
these signs into degrees and minutes just as the Babylonians and Greeks did.
Now, the Vasishtha-siddhanta really only does this as a supplement to the more
traditional Indian system of 27 or 28 nakshatras that I described in the last
episode, but we see that by this point Indian astronomers were no longer
developing their ideas in isolation from the western world.

In addition to this obviously western influence, the Vasishtha-siddhanta
expands the scope of the astronomy it's interested in relative to the Jyotisha.
The Vasishtha-siddhanta describes the concept of the anomalistic month, which
is the time it takes the moon to go from perigee to perigee.  The moon's orbit
is slightly elliptical, so when it is closest to earth at perigee, it moves
faster than average, and when it's farthest from the earth at apogee, it moves
more slowly than average.  This variation in its speed over the course of the
orbit is called the anomaly, and so the time it takes the moon to go from its
maximum apparent speed to maximum apparent speed on the sky is called the
anomalistic month.  The Vasishtha-siddhanta actually gives two separate lengths
for the length of the anomalistic month.  The first is somewhat simpler, 248 /
9 days, or 27.555 days, which is off by about 1 and a half minutes.  But in
another place it gives another, more accurate value of 3031 / 110 days, which
works out to be 27 days 13 hours 18 minutes and 32.7 seconds and is off by just
half a second.

The last development of the Vasishtha Siddhanta that I'll mention is its
description of the planets.  The treatment isn't terribly sophisticated, but
it's nevertheless a fairly monumental development just by sheer virtue of being
there at all.  The text names the five planets and describes their motions both
qualitatively and quantitatively.  It says that the planets in general have a
prograde motion from west to east, but that they undergo periods of retrograde
motion as well, with stationary points in between.  And then it gives the
values for the synodic periods of the five planets, along with the ratio
between the sidereal period and the synodic period.

Well, the next two siddhantas seem to have been of a more explicitly western
origin.  The first of these is called the Paulisa Siddhanta, and it's believed
that the name, Paulisa, refers to a Greek astronomer whose name was some
variant of "Paul."  During the Islamic Era, a Muslim astronomer named Al-Biruni
was more specific and wrote that this author was a Greek from some city called
"Saintra," that Al-Biruni was not himself familiar with.  But he speculated
that the this "Saintra" have have been a Sanskrit version of the city
Alexandria.

Now, one thing I should mention at this point is that by the time that the
siddhantas had been written in the middle of the first millennium, Indian
astronomy had evolved to become heavily mathematical.  In fact, as in ancient
Greece, there wasn't a strong distinction between mathematics and astronomy.
Mathematics was simply a part of doing astronomy, and many of the great Indian
astronomers were also the great Indian mathematicians.  If you were to listen
to a podcast on the history of mathematics, the episode on Indian mathematics
would turn up mostly the same list of names and texts.

So with the Paulisa Siddhanta many of the new developments are from a
conceptual standpoint, rather unremarkable.  But from a technical standpoint,
they represented a huge advance in the mathematical techniques of the
astronomers of this period.  The Paulisa Siddhanta gives you, for instance,
methods to calculate the position of the Sun and Moon.  First by calculating
the position of the mean Sun and mean Moon, and then applying the corrections
you need to make to account for the fact that the orbits are elliptical, so the
Sun and Moon do not move uniformly on the sky --- sometimes they move faster,
and sometimes they move slower.  This technique for correcting for the anomaly
was called the "kendra," and unfortunately the text just gives the steps that
you need to do to perform the calculation but it doesn't actually show how this
method was derived.  In another place, the Paulisa Siddhanta has an equation
which is today called the "sunrise equation," because it can be used to figure
out when sunrise and sunset will be, and from that the length of day and night.
Rather than the simple linear zig-zag function that the Vedanga Jyotisha used,
along with the ancient Babylonians and Egyptians, where each day gets longer by
a constant amount until the summer solstice, and then gets shorter by a
constant amount until the winter solstice, the method in the Paulisa Siddhanta
is actually trigonometric, and accounts for the spherical geometry of the
Earth.  To make these kinds of trigonometric calculations possible, the text
also includes sine tables, which list out the values of the various
trigonometric functions at different angles.

The other Siddhanta with a clear western influence was called the Romaka
Siddhanta, the name "Romaka" being a Sanskritization of the word "Roman."
Traditionally it was attributed to an author named "Srisena," but later
scholarship has found that he compiled the work from earlier sources, and
apparently did so rather poorly.  Even not too long after the work was written,
there were those who doubted Srisena's competence.  The astronomer Brahmagupta,
about whom I'll have more to say later, wrote that Srisena had "taken a heap of
jewels and turned it into a patched rag."

At any rate, the astronomy of the Romaka Siddhanta is quite similar to the
astronomy of Ptolemy, and many of the measurements it presents are very close
to the Ptolemaic values.  Now this could, on the one hand, simply be a
coincidence because the Ptolemaic values were fairly accurate, but they seem to
be too similar to just be a coincidence.  That said, the numbers aren't
identical either, which suggests that the Indian astronomers had taken
Ptolemy's techniques and used them to make their own measurements rather than
copying his numbers wholesale.  And, it should be said, as a reminder here of
episodes 21 and 23, that when I say Ptolemy's numbers and Ptolemy's techniques,
it's really Hipparchus's numbers and Hipparchus's techniques and Ptolemy was
mostly recording Hipparchus's work for posterity.  So, for example, in the
Romaka Siddhanta, the length of the tropical year is given to be 365 days, 5
hours 55 minutes and 12 seconds, whereas Hipparchus had gotten a value of 365
days, 5 hours, 55 minutes and 15.8 seconds.  So, these two measurements were
within 4 seconds of each other, but they were both about 6 minutes longer than
the true value.  So, clearly the author of the Romaka Siddhanta wasn't just
cribbing off of Ptolemy, but it's also the case that these two values are too
close to just be a coincidence.

One other place where the author of the Romaka Siddhanta clearly adopted Greek
techniques to Indian astronomy was in the Metonic cycle.  You may recall from
Episode 17 that Meton of Athens had discovered that phases of the moon along
with solar and lunar eclipses repeat in a 19 year cycle today called the
Metonic cycle.  Once you have established this cycle, predicting eclipses
becomes much easier because you just have to look at what happened 19 years ago
to predict what is going to happen today.  The trouble is that the Metonic
cycle is not an even number of days, or, in particular, since Indian astronomy
recognized several different kinds of days, it wasn't an even number of savana
days, or civil days, from sunrise to sunrise.  But by multiplying the cycle by
150 they got a cycle which that was quite close to being an even number of
savana days.

The last of the five astronomical siddhantas is the Surya Siddhanta, and was
the most sophisticated of the bunch.  As was generally the case with classical
Indian literature, the Surya Siddhanta was written in verse.  You might recall
from Episode 27 on the Astronomica by Marcus Manilius that that work was also
written in verse, and we discussed back then how writing an astronomical work
as poetry poses a certain set of challenges, namely that there are just a lot
of numbers that you need to convey, and it's just difficult and frankly boring
to do that in verse.  Well this was also a problem for the Surya Siddhanta and
the way that its authors dealt with this problem was by using what is called
the Bhutasamkhya system.  Rather than representing numbers with distinct
symbols as we do today, numbers were represented with words.  So, for instance,
the number 2 was represented with the word for "eye," since people have two
eyes.  The number 5 was represented with the word for "arrow," since the god
Kamadeva was traditionally depicted as holding 5 arrows made of flowers.  But
this system was not unique.  To make it easier to conform to the poetic
structure multiple words could represent the same number.  So, for instance,
the number 1 could be represented with the word for "earth," since there was
only one earth, but it could equally well be represented by the word for
"moon," since there is also only one moon.  Some larger numbers had their own
representations.  The number 32 could be represented by the word for "tooth,"
since a person has 32 teeth, and the number 33 could be represented by the word
for "the gods," since at least in some traditions there were 33 gods in the
Hindu pantheon.  But for larger numbers the strategy was to string the numbers
together in a base-10 numbering system.  One of the most interesting features
of this number system is that in order to do this effectively, you need the
concept of the number "zero," since otherwise you can't distinguish between the
numbers 11 and 101.  The Bhutasamkhya system used the word "sky" for this
purpose since the sky is empty.  This seems to have been the first step toward
the development of a unique symbol to represent the number zero which first
developed in India in the subsequent few centuries.

Well, being the most sophisticated of the astronomical siddhantas, the Surya
Siddhanta is highly mathematical, and its innovations are rather technical, so
its contents are somewhat difficult to describe in a podcast.  But I will at
least try to give a sampling of some of the topics it covers.  At its
foundation is a quite complete description of spherical astronomy.  Spherical
astronomy is a way of measuring the positions of different celestial bodies by
imagining that we are surrounded by a great sphere and the different celestial
bodies are points on this sphere.  When we do this, there are a couple of
important landmarks.  There is the zenith, which is the point right above our
heads, and the nadir, which is the point directly below our feet.  The Surya
Siddhanta calls these the "urdhva swastika," and the "adha swastika,"
respectively, "urdhva" meaning "upward," and "adha" meaning "downward."  The
word swastika means exactly what you think.  Despite its later association in
the West with Nazism, originated in India and the symbol had a variety of
meanings, often as a good luck symbol since the name literally translates into
something like "well-being."  But the symbol also seems to have long had an
association with the universe as a whole.  A possible source of this
association is from the north celestial pole.  If you imagine drawing the
Little Dipper four times over the course of a day, six hours apart, each time
it will be 90 degrees rotated and at the end of the day you will have drawn
something that looks a little bit like a swastika.  Incidentally, the Surya
Siddhanta has another similarity to the Astronomica of Marcus Manilius in that
it posits that just as there is a pole star at the north celestial pole by
symmetry there is also a pole star at the south celestial pole as well.

At any rate, halfway between the zenith and the nadir is a great circle which
represents the horizon, and we can't see anything that is below the horizon.
The Surya Siddhanta then marks the cardinal directions of north, south, east,
and west and gives a method for finding them.  Plant a stick in the ground and
draw a circle around it.  Then watch the shadow of the stick over the course of
a day.  Sometime in the morning and the afternoon the end of the stick's shadow
will exactly touch the circle.  Mark those two points.  Then you draw a line
between them and that tells you the direction of east and west.  Then it
defines the meridian, called the yamyottara-vrtta, which is a great circle in
the sky that goes from north, through the zenith above you, to south.  The
ecliptic, or the path of the Sun on the sky over the course of the year, is
also defined, and its inclination is given to be 24°, only about half a degree
off from its true value.  The Surya Siddhanta also uses a number of concepts
that aren't often used in modern day astronomy.  There's a circle called the
"prime vertical," which is like the meridian, except that it goes east-west
instead of north-south.  And there's also the "6 o'clock hour circle," which
also starts out at east and west, but goes through the north celestial pole
rather than the zenith.

The Surya Siddhanta applies spherical geometry to these various concepts to
derive a number of useful relations.  For instance, if you measure the angle of
the shadow of a gnomon on an equinox, it tells you how to calculate your
latitude.  That is a fairly straightforward calculation to make, but it has
more complicated relationships, too, like the declination of the Sun as a
function of its ecliptic longitude.  This, then, can be used to calculate when
the Sun rises and sets over the course of a year.  The last thing I'll mention
about the Surya Siddhanta is its description of the planets.  By the time we
get to the Surya Siddhanta, Indian planetary astronomy has really come a long
way.  In the last episode on the Vedanga Jyotisha, my discussion of the planets
was mostly about how they didn't have much to say about the planets.  There
are a few plausible references in the Vedic literature, but they're fairly
oblique and don't really have much to say except that the planets exist.  By
contrast the discussion of the planets in the Surya Siddhanta is quite
comprehensive.

To start off with, the Surya Siddhanta actually identifies the five planets,
which is more than can be said of the astronomical literature of Vedic period.
And more than that, it orders them based on the speed of sidereal motion, with
the Moon being closest to Earth, and then Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars,
Jupiter, and Saturn being most distant.  It also identifies the retrograde
motion of the planets.  Compared to the Greeks and Babylonians, the Surya
Siddhanta uses a finer grained classification system.  You may recall that the
Babylonians had five points they were interested in, called stations: there was
first appearance, when the planet emerged from behind the sun, the first
stationary point, when the prograde motion stopped, opposition, and then the
second stationary point, when the retrograde motion stopped, and finally the
last appearance, after which the planet went back behind the sun.  Well the
Surya Siddhanta divides the orbit into eight kinds of motion.  Three of these
are periods of retrograde motion: there is vakra, or retrograde motion;
anuvakra, or somewhat retrograde motion; and kutila, which is transverse, or
stationary.  Then there are five categories of prograde motion: manda, or slow;
mandatara, very slow; sama, even; sighra, swift; and finally sighratara, or
very swift.

The Surya Siddhanta's model of planetary motion was more than qualitative,
though.  It was of a similar level of sophistication as Ptolemy.  Now, the
challenge with modeling the observed movements of the planets is that you have
several complications you have to account for.  First off, since the Earth is
revolving around the Sun, we are observing the planets from a moving platform.
Then secondly, the observed motions of the planets have to be corrected for the
fact that both the planet's orbit and the Earth's orbit are not perfectly
circular.  As we learned from Episode 20, there are two ways you can model
this, which turn out to be mathematically equivalent.  One is with eccentric
circles.  You assume that the planet is moving in a circle, but the center of
this circle is somewhat offset from the Earth.  This center point then revolves
around the Earth as well.  The other way you can do it is with epicycles.  With
epicycles, we take the planet's orbit and then we add on a second, smaller
circle and put the planet on that.  Well, the Surya Siddhanta uses both
techniques to model the planetary motion.  The motion of the Earth's orbit is
captured by the epicycles, but the planets are also placed on eccentric circles
to account for the fact that their orbits were also eccentric.

In addition to detailing this highly sophisticated planetary model, the Surya
Siddhanta provides the various parameters that go into it, based on, most
importantly, the synodic periods of the planets.  It then combines these various
periods to find a universal cycle that all the planets participate in.  This
grand yuga is about 180,000 years long, 65,746,575 days, to be precise.  At the
beginning of this period, all the planets are in conjunction and they do not
return to conjunction all together until this 180,000 year cycle is completed.
Finally, the Surya Siddhanta combines this grand yuga into ever longer periods
called the mahayuga.  The mahayuga gets divided into four ages, much like the
five ages of man that Hesiod described.  The first of the mahayuga's ages is
called "Krta," or the golden age, and lasts 1,728,000 years.  During this time,
mankind was governed by the gods and all that man produced was ideal and pure.
During the age of Krta the Vana Parva says,

> Men neither bought nor sold; there were no poor and no rich; there was no
> need to labour, because all that men required was obtained by the power of
> will; the chief virtue was the abandonment of all worldly desires. The Krita
> Yuga was without disease; there was no lessening with the years; there was no
> hatred, or vanity, or evil thought whatsoever; no sorrow, no fear. All
> mankind could attain to supreme blessedness.

Krta is followed by "Treta," the Silver Age, which lasts 1,296,000 years.  One
of the symbols that appears in depictions of these ages is of a bull who
represents Dharma, which can very roughly be translated as "virtue," or
"morality," or "religious duty".  During the age of Krta, this bull stands
sturdily on the four legs of religion, symbolizing the four vedas, but in
Treta, one of these legs has disappeared.  In fact, etymologically, the name
"treta" just means "three," so this is the "Age of Three."  During this time,
mankind was no longer ruled completely by the gods and had to turn to sacrifice
to acquire the favor of the gods.  Mankind had to engage in labor and commerce.
Thus it is during Treta that the castes emerge, with the Brahmans devoted to
performing the sacrifices, the vaishyas to trade and commerce, and the sudras
to work the land and perform other labor.  But during this time there was no
conflict between the classes.

Treta is followed by "Dvapara," the Bronze Age, which lasts 864,000 years.
During this time the third of the bull of Dharma's legs has disappeared, and
the bull is left standing more precariously on only two legs: compassion and
truthfulness.  And in fact the word "Dvapara" means two, so this is literally
the "Age of Two." Now, conflict and envy enter the world.  Wars break out and
officials become corrupt.  The commoners distrust their rulers.

And finally the current age is called "Kali," and is the "Iron Age," and we are
432,000 years into this present age.  Now rulers have abandoned virtue entirely
and people struggle simply to survive.  If we look at the lengths of these four
ages, we find that the ratio of the length of these ages to each other is then
4:3:2:1.  

Well, not long after these five Siddhantas were written, we at long last begin
to see the names of the great Indian astronomers survive down to us.  The first
of these is Aryabhata, and he is perhaps the greatest of India's astronomers,
at least until Chandrasekhar in the 20th century.  Now, even though we have his
name and the names of other later astronomers, one common feature you'll find
here is that, as with the early Greek astronomers, not too many biographical
details survive down to us.  In the case of Aryabhata it seems that he was born
in 476 AD.  This detail comes to us from his magnum opus, a comprehensive
astronomical text appropriately called the Aryabhatiya.  At least if
Aryabhata's claims are to be believed, he says that he wrote this text in the
year 499 AD at the age of 23.  Now, this does seem to be absurdly young for a
work of its sophistication, but if we look at the other greats that science has
offered us, it is perhaps not without precedent.  After all, Richard Feynman
developed the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics at 23 as well.
Évariste Galois developed what is today known as Galois theory at the age of
twenty.  By contrast Albert Einstein was a bit of a late bloomer, waiting until
the age of 25 to develop the theory of relativity.  So we shouldn't reject out
of hand the possibility that he really did write this work at 23.  Aryabhata's
location is somewhat more uncertain than the year of his birth.  He writes that
the science of astronomy is held in high esteem in Kusumapura, which is in
northeast India in the Ganges river plain, but doesn't directly say that that
is where he is from.  Nevertheless, because of this, he is associated with this
area.  But later astronomers frequently say that he came from Asmaka country
which is in the far south.  And in support of this, the textual record
indicates that his writings were frequently studied and commented on in the
south of India, so he seems to have had strong ties there.  It's possible that
he was born in one of these locations but moved to the other, probably being
born in Asmaka and moving to Kusumapura which was closer to the locus of
political power in India.

The Aryabhatiya is broken into four sections.  The first of these is the
Gitikapanda.  This is a kind of introductory section which describes the
importance of astronomy and lays out some of the basic techniques that will be
used.  Already here we see an important innovation.  Here Aryabhata describes a
new numbering system, which is today just called the Aryabhata numbering
system.  The older Bhutasamkhya system that I described earlier was, as you can
probably imagine, somewhat cumbersome.  Each number got an entire word and
there were multiple words that could correspond to a particular number.  This
was useful for poetry where one word might fit the verse if another wouldn't
do, but is really pretty annoying if you're trying to compute something.
Aryabhata associated a number with each possible syllable that is allowed in
Sanskrit phonology.  Each syllable is one consonant followed by one vowel.
There are 33 consonants and 9 vowels.  Each consonant gives the numeral, and
the vowel gives the place in the number.  The first 25 of the 33 consonants
just give the number 1 through twenty-five.  After that they go in increments
of 10, so the next one, "y-" is 30, then "r-" is 40 and so on up to 100.
Because the consonants get you up to 100, the vowels then let you move up in
factors of 100 rather than factors of 10 as we have in our unit system.  So
numbers ending in the vowel "-a" are multiplied by a 1, numbers ending in "-i"
are multiplied by 100, numbers ending in "-u" are multiplied by 10,000.  And
since there are 9 vowels, this gets you all the way up to 10 to the power of
16, or 10 quadrillion, which is large enough for all practical purposes.  The
numbers were denoted the opposite way they are today, so the smallest digits
were written first and the most significant digits came last.  So, for example,
the number 215 would be represented as "ṇa khi", "ṇa" for 15, and "khi" for two
hundred.  Now, some of the numbers aren't directly included.  So, for instance,
there are unique sounds for numbers up to 25, but after that it skips to 30.
So for a number like 26, you'd just join two separate numbers, 20 and 6.  This
system had a couple of big advantages over the earlier Bhutasamkhya system.
Firstly, it was completely regular.  Rather than needing to remember which of
the various words corresponded to which numbers, the word itself told you what
the number was.  You just had to remember the order of the alphabet and apply
the rules.  The next big advantage was that it was very easy to get a sense of
a number's size.  Now, the Bhutasamkhya system did have one nice feature, which
is that like our modern numbering system, you could just string numbers
together and implicitly get larger and larger numbers since each digit in the
number represented another factor of 10.  But the nice thing about associating
each place in a number with a unique vowel, is that just by looking at the
vowel of the last digit, you can immediately tell how large the number is.  You
don't need to go through the pesky task of counting the digits in the number to
figure out if it's 10 billion or 100 billion.  The number just tells you
itself.

The next section of the Aryabhatiya is called Ganitapada.  This section is
purely mathematical, and develops all the necessary mathematical machinery for
the astronomy in the later sections.  As I mentioned earlier, at this time
there wasn't a large distinction between mathematics and astronomy.
Mathematics was generally developed for the purpose of astronomy and the great
astronomers were by the nature of what they were doing also great
mathematicians.  That said, as with the Greeks, although the ancient Indians
did closely associate the two subjects, they also did recognize that they were
distinct, which is why these topics get their own unique sections rather than
mushing them together with the astronomy.  At any rate, this section has things
like arithmetic and geometric sequences and a derivation of the quadratic
equation.

The third section is called Kalakriyapada and this is where the astronomy
really gets going.  Here Aryabhata deals with techniques for keeping time, how
to measure the solar year and the lunar year and how to insert intercalary
months into the calendar.  Then he gets into planetary models.  Here he takes
the model of the Surya Siddhanta and makes it even more sophisticated.  The
Surya Siddhanta model was an eccentric-epicycle model.  That is, it had both
eccentric circles and epicycles.  In modern terms, the epicycles accounted for
the Earth's motion around the Sun, and the eccentric circles accounted for the
eccentricity of the planet's orbit.  But of course the Earth itself is on an
eccentric orbit, so this model could not account for that eccentricity.  To
deal with this, the Aryabhatiya added a modification where the revolution of
the epicycles varied between even and odd quadrants.  This ended up producing a
planetary model that rivaled Ptolemy in its accuracy.  Incidentally, this
section makes clear that Aryabhata was not writing his work for a general
audience.  Not only is the material highly technical, but he also skips some of
the important basic components, most importantly how to calculate the mean
motion of the planets.  In essence, he only tells you what the corrections you
need to apply are.  He seems to have assumed that anyone reading his book will
be learned enough to already know how to do these simple things.  In this way,
the Aryabhatiya is almost like a modern day research monograph, where the
author assumes that the reader already knows the fundamentals of the field and
doesn't need to have them rehashed.

But that is not all.  In this section Aryabhata also calculates the distances
to the various planets.  For this he uses a similar technique to Hipparchus, by
effectively measuring parallax during a lunar eclipse to get the distance to
the moon and the Sun.  Now, as I discussed back in Episode 21, this is quite a
difficult measurement to make, and Aryabhata was off by many orders of
magnitude from their true values just as Hipparchus was.  This, incidentally,
is a common theme in the history of astronomy.  Astronomers throughout the ages
have continually been astonished at just how large the universe is, and their
measurements have historically almost always been too low.  This bias is
probably due to two factors.  The first is psychological.  We are all human and
are familiar with human scale things.  We can comprehend the distances between
towns and we know that there are other countries in places far away that it
takes a very long time to get to.  But beyond that, our intuition starts to
break down.  Even the size of the Earth itself is hard for us to comprehend.
But once you start looking at the distance to the Sun, the distance is just so
much vastly larger than anything we are familiar with.  So astronomers of the
past tended to prefer measurements of the distances to various celestial bodies
that were very large, certainly much larger than anything on Earth, but not too
much larger than that, because it was just hard to comprehend those scales.
But there was probably another factor which is somewhat more technical.  And
this is just that when you are measuring distances in astronomy, in general,
any errors in your measurements have a tendency to bias you towards smaller
distances.  In the case of these ancient measurements, astronomers were
essentially looking for an effect called parallax --- that an object viewed
from two different locations on Earth will appear to be in slightly different
locations relative to the background stars, just as when you're looking out the
window in a car, nearby trees seem to move more rapidly than mountains in the
distance.  The trouble is, these objects are quite far away, so the parallax
effects are pretty small.  Smaller distances produce larger parallaxes and
larger distances produce smaller parallaxes.  But if there is any error in your
measurement, this will tend to make the object appear to move more than it
really did.  It's just very unlikely that your error will happen to be of the
same magnitude and in the exact opposite direction as your effect so that the
two cancel.  Consequently, any observational errors tend to produce a larger
apparent parallax than there really is, and that introduces a bias towards
smaller distances.  If the size of your error is much larger than the size of
the true parallax effect, as it was in ancient times, the distance you obtain
is essentially just a measurement of the error in your measurement rather than
the actual distance to the object.  So it took quite a long time, really until
the Enlightenment with the development of more sophisticated measuring
apparatuses, before these kinds of measurements got distances that were
approximately correct.

Well, the last section of the Aryabhatiya is the "Golapada," from the word
"gola" which means sphere, and this is essentially a treatise on spherical
astronomy.  In modern times, the section on spherical astronomy comes at the
beginning of a textbook, but Aryabhata puts it at the end, which seems to
suggest that he viewed this kind of astronomy as the culmination of the
science.  Now, many of the concepts developed here are similar to the Surya
Siddhanta, with perhaps more sophistication, but the main innovation in this
section is Aryabhata's controversial claim that the Earth rotates.  Aryabhata
seems to have been the first Indian astronomer to unambiguously argue that the
reason that the stars, and planets appear to rise and set through the night is
because it is really the Earth that is rotating.  He makes an analogy to a man
in a boat moving down the river.  He seems a tree on the shore that appears to
be moving backwards.  But of course the tree is not really moving backwards, it
just appears to be doing so because the boat is floating down the river.
Likewise the stars do not really revolve around the Earth, but it is the Earth
that is rotating which produces the appearance of their motion.  Of course
today this idea seems quite plausible, but it was by no means accepted by later
astronomers in India and was one of the more contentious aspects of Aryabhata's
astronomy for centuries to come.

The next astronomer I wanted to mention is called Bhaskara I.  He is given the
number "the first" to distinguish him from another mathematician and astronomer
who was also named Bhaskara but lived in the 12th century, so we'll have to
wait a while until we start to get into the astronomy of the middle ages well
after the arrival of Islam.  This first Bhaskara was probably active in the
late 6th century and early 7th century, and as with Aryabhata we aren't
entirely certain of his location.  He seems to have had some association with
Asmaka in south India just like Aryabhata, but also Surastra in Western India.
So it's speculated, as with Aryabhata, that maybe he was born in one and then
lived and worked in the other.  Bhaskara wrote three texts, but the most
important is probably the Mahabhaskariya.  In many ways, this text filled in
the gaps left by Aryabhata in his work.  As I said earlier, Aryabhatiya is
almost like a research monograph, and seems to assume that the reader is
familiar with the state of the art of astronomy of the day.  Even fairly
technical details like how to compute the mean motions of the planets are
omitted.  And the text is fairly terse, so if you're just reading it in
isolation, it's hard to really learn from it.  It's an ancient version of the
stereotypical abstruse mathematical textbook that just lists the theorems and
says that the proofs are left as an exercise for the reader.  The
Mahabhaskariya is a gentler introduction to Aryabhata's astronomy.  Bhaskara I
includes the details that were beneath Aryabhata to include like how to compute
the mean motions of the planets.  In fact, Bhaskara is generally credited as
being the one to invent a particular technique he calls the "kuttaka," because
Aryabhata's mentioning of it is so impenetrable that it's not really obvious
that he really figured it out.  The kuttaka literally means "pulverization,"
which is interesting because Bhaskara's instinct to name it this seem to have
paralleled Isaac Newton's instinct to choose the name "calculus" for his
discovery which literally means "pebble." Calculus and kuttaka are really quite
distinct things, but both rely on a general mathematical technique of taking a
larger thing and then repeatedly breaking it up into smaller and smaller bits
that can be more easily analyzed.  Well, the kuttaka is an algorithm for
finding solutions to Diophantine equations, and at the time Bhaskara was
writing it was the most sophisticated algorithm developed.  A Diophantine
equation is an equation where all the coefficients and unknowns are integers.
So in the simplest kind of Diophantine equation you might have something like a
times x plus b times y equals c, where a, b, and c are integers that are given
to you but you need to figure out the numbers x and y and they have to be
integers as well.  These kinds of equations come up in astronomy when you're
trying to find the length of the overall period it takes two cycles to line up.
For instance, if you know the synodic period of Mars this will tell you how
long it will take Mars to go between opposition and opposition.  Likewise if
you have the synodic period of Saturn, this will tell you the time it takes
Saturn to go between opposition and opposition.  But let's suppose Mars and
Saturn are in opposition at the same time and thus are in conjunction with each
other?  How long will it be before this happens again?  Figuring this out, at
least in terms of an integer number of days or months as the ancients were
interested in doing, requires you to solve a Diophantine equation.

Bhaskara I's other claim to fame is that he was the first to correctly describe
the physical mechanism of solar and lunar eclipses.  I mentioned in the last
episode that in the late Vedic period, the prevailing theory of eclipses is
called the "rahu-ketu" theory of eclipses.  Now, to maybe make a bit of
pedantic distinction, astronomically, this older theory was correct.  "Rahu"
and "ketu" were essentially the two nodes of the Moon's orbit, and so it
identified the fact that an eclipse could only occur when the moon was full or
new as it passed through one of these nodes.  But the "rahu-ketu" theory had no
physical mechanism for why this occurred.  It seems to have been understood
somewhat mythologically, as the Moon or Sun getting devoured by a beast at
these points.  Bhaskara I provided an astrophysical model of eclipses in Indian
astronomy.  He argued that lunar eclipses were caused by the moon entering into
the shadow of the Earth.  He wrote:

> The orbit of the moon is below that of the Sun.  Just as a cloud moving from
> behind covers the sun so does the moon moving faster cover the sun from
> behind.  That is why the western part of the sun is eclipsed by the moon
> first and the eastern side released last. Owing to differences in the
> latitude eclipses are sometimes seen and sometimes missed.

Well, the last astronomer I will mention in our tour of ancient Indian
astronomy is Brahmagupta.  Brahmagupta was born at the beginning of the 7th
century, probably about one or two generations later than Bhaskara I.  Here we
at least are somewhat more confident about his location, coming from the north
of Gujarat in the Indus river valley.  Brahmagupta's principal work is the
Brahmasphuta Siddhanta, which he wrote at age 30 in the year 628.  The work
consists of 24 chapters, most of which are a comprehensive summary of the known
astronomy of the time.  But probably the chapter everyone remembers best is
chapter 11, in which Brahmagupta gives a no holds barred critique of all the
other astronomical systems that had been proposed.  Religious dogma was no
barrier for Brahmagupta and he started with the Vedanga Jyotisha and argued
that the 5 year yuga is a terrible system for timekeeping.  But his critiques
are not limited to the Hindu religion.  He also brings the Jains into the mix
and says that their notion that there are two suns and two moons is patently
absurd.  He even attacks the great Aryabhata for his various innovations, but
above all believes that Aryabhata made a fool of himself for proposing the
ridiculous idea that the Earth rotates.  The idea that lunar eclipses are
caused by the Earth's shadow is also attacked.

Well, Brahmagupta seems to have been a rather strong-headed youth when he wrote
the Brahmasphuta Siddhanta, but he apparently mellowed with age.  37 years
later, at the age of 67 he wrote another work called the Khandakhadyaka.  By
this point in his life it seems he had more or less come around to Aryabhata's
astronomical system and this book is heavily based on it, and he even provided
a few improvements of his own.  In the end, Brahmagupta turned out to be one of
the most highly influential astronomers in history.  Both of his works were
translated into Arabic not too much later in the 8th century, very early in the
development of Islamic astronomy.  Consequently, they were tremendously
influential on the Islamic astronomy of the middle ages, which we will
eventually get around to on this podcast.

Well, perhaps the next major astronomer in India is Bhaskara II, and as I
mentioned earlier, he is in the 12th century, so by the time we get to him we
are well into the Islamic era in India.  So his story will have to wait until
then.  With that, we will leave India behind, at least for the time being, and
move to the northeast, to another great civilization that has existed
continuously since the ancient world: China.  I hope you'll join me then.
Until the next full moon, good night and clear skies.

## Additional references

* Rao, Indian Astronomy
* Kak, Birth and Early Development of Indian Astronomy
* Ghosh, Descriptive Archaeoastronomy and Ancient Indian Chronology
* Subbarayappa, A Concise History of Science in India
