---
categories: episode
date: '2023-05-10'
description: The oldest plausible astronomical artifacts known are African, as are
  many of the oldest megaliths, around 10,000 of which dot the Sahara and whose orientations
  are astronomical in character. We then briefly survey some of the creation stories
  and sky myths from a number of the peoples of sub-Saharan Africa. Finally, we turn
  to a few of the more unique calendars in the region.
keywords:
- astronomy
- history
- africa
layout: episode
number: 29
title: The Astronomy of Saharan and Sub-Saharan Africa
---

## Transcript

Good evening, and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon, or
thereabouts.  My name is Joe Antognini.

Well last episode we started our grand tour of the astronomy of the globe with
the astronomy of prehistoric Europe.  In this episode we'll now travel south
of the Mediterranean and take a look at the astronomy of Africa.  If I were
starting this podcast all over again I'd probably begin here rather starting
with the astronomy of ancient Mesopotamia.  After all, humanity originated in
Africa so unsurprisingly the oldest astronomy is African.  But as we saw last
episode in the astronomy of prehistoric Europe, the longer back in time we
look, the more speculative our knowledge becomes.  So we will begin with some
of the oldest and most tentative connections to astronomy and then see how
various modern groups practice astronomy, at least around the time of
colonization when more definitive records start to survive.

But before we get into the astronomy proper, it would be worth spending a
little bit of time getting familiar with the geography and population history
of Africa.  Africa sits rather symmetrically about the equator and so its
climate going north to south exhibits a certain symmetry about the equator.
Going from north to south, the northernmost strip of Africa is really quite
distinct from the rest of the continent.  I titled this episode the astronomy
of Saharan and Sub-Saharan Africa because culturally North Africa bears more of
a connection to other Mediterranean cultures along with the cultures of Arabia.
South of this strip is the vast Sahara desert, which is a bit of a redundant
name since Sahara simply means "desert" in Arabic.  Technically the Sahara is
only the world's third largest desert, but that is only because Antarctica and
the Arctic both count as deserts.  But of the hot deserts the Sahara is by far
the largest, being more than three times larger than the next largest desert in
Australia.  The Sahara is probably the most important geographical feature of
Africa, at least in terms of the histories of the people who have lived on the
continent, because it severely limited the extent of cross-cultural connections
between Africa and the rest of the Eurasian landmass.  The Sahara sits at
around 30 degrees of latitude which is where the Hadley convection cells in the
atmosphere at tropical latitudes meet with the Ferrel cells at the temperate
latitudes.  Where they meet are the so-called "horse latitudes," and there is
little large scale atmospheric activity there.  Consequently these latitudes
tend to be characterized by low wind and low precipitation.  Now, the Sahara is
not totally inhospitable.  Since ancient times there has been a network of
trade routes that have criss-crossed the desert.  But to make the trek worth
it, only very high value goods would be moved across the desert, and
historically the major ones were gold, salt, and slaves.

Just south of the Sahara is a band of temperate climates called the Sahel, and
here agriculture is possible.  Unlike the Mediterranean climate to the north,
the Sahel sees its big rains during the summer rather than the winter, so crops
that do well in the Mediterranean tend to fare poorly in the Sahel and vice
versa.  Moving further south is a band centering on the equator where the
climate is, unsurprisingly tropical and is characterized by dense rainforests.
Then moving further south still there is a similar pattern of climates but
roughly in reverse.  South of the rainforests the climate becomes more
temperate with the famous African savannas.  At around 30 degrees latitude
south of the equator you hit the horse latitudes again and there is another
large desert, the Kalahari desert, Kalahari deriving from the Tswana word for
"great thirst."  And the southernmost strip of the continent once again has a
Mediterranean climate.

Apart from this north-south variation in climate, geologically there is a
substantial east-west variation, sweeping from around Namibia in the southwest,
and then north and to the east up through Ethiopia.  The northwestern half of
the continent is geologically older, relatively flat and low-lying.  The
eastern half is younger, more geologically active and generally at higher
elevations.  On the eastern side of the continent is where the African plate
meets another tectonic plate, the Somali plate.  These two plates are
separating from each other, the African plate drifting west and the Somali
plate east.  The long boundary between the two forms the so called Great Rift
Valley, and along this strip running north to south on the eastern side of the
continent there is a string of large lakes, called, uncreatively, the Great
Lakes.

This geography played an important role in determining how Africa has the
population distribution that it does today.  Now Africa is very large and very
diverse, there are more than a billion people who live there and some 2000
languages.  But the populations of Africa can be grouped into five very broad
families, largely based on their language families, but also from genetic and
cultural markers as well.  The first of these are those who speak languages
from the Afroasiatic family.  This population is distributed throughout North
Africa, the Sahara and to some extent the Sahel, and northeastern Africa.  For
those of us with a Western background, the best known branch of the Afroasiatic
languages would probably be the Semitic languages, Hebrew, Aramaic, Akkadian,
and so on.  But around half of the Semitic languages are African and in fact
the Semitic languages are actually the only branch of the Afroasiatic family
that extended out of Africa.

The second major family is the Niger-Congo language family.  This family
developed in West Africa and saw a rather remarkable expansion.  Around 4000 BC
or so agriculture was independently developed in West Africa by people who
spoke Niger-Congo languages.  This may have been by peoples who spoke languages
from the Bantu branch in particular, or perhaps their neighbors.  But either
way, not too long after, thanks to this new technology speakers of the Bantu
branch of the Niger-Congo family then were able to rapidly expand from around
modern day Cameroon to almost the entire continent, to the Indian ocean in the
east and all the way down south to the Cape of Good Hope.  Today almost
everybody south of the equator in Africa are descendants from this Bantu
expansion.

In this process of expansion, the Bantu peoples encountered and largely
overwhelmed two other groups, who were hunter-gatherers.  At the equatorial
latitudes there's the Pygmies.  These groups were heavily fragmented by the
Bantu expansion and unfortunately their indigenous languages mostly died out,
apart from loanwords which persisted into the Bantu languages that they now
speak.  The other group is indigenous to the southern latitudes.
Anthropologists broadly call this group the Khoisan because the group consists
of two main parts, the Khoikhoi, who are pastoralists, and the San, who are
hunter-gatherers.

Now a word about nomenclature.  The words for these two groups, the Pygmies and
the Khoisan are not great.  In the case of the Pygmies they generally consider
the term to be pejorative, and in the case of the San, the word derives from a
Khoikhoi term which is pejorative in that language.  But these groups have only
native words for their individual ethnic groups like the Mbuti and Twa among
the Pygmies or the Kung and Ju'hoansi among the San.  Because they have no word
that refers to the collection of these groups there hasn't been any obvious
alternatives, so the terms have persisted in the literature.  At any rate I
will follow the lead of the anthropologists here and refer to them by the
standard terms Pygmy and Khoisan.

As an aside, the Khoisan is a particularly fascinating group linguistically.
The Khoisan languages are unique for including a wide variety of clicks as
phonemes.  And in some cases some members even speak a second language
consisting entirely of clicks which are used for hunting since those sounds are
less likely to alert their prey to their presence.  Khoisan languages
influenced some of the Bantu languages in southern Africa like Xhosa, which
adopted some of the click phonemes in Khoisan languages.

The Khoisan and Pygmies are also particularly notable for their genetic
diversity.  Roughly speaking, if you were to look solely at people's genomes,
you would divide the human population into three broad categories: one group
with extremely high genetic diversity, another group with moderate genetic
diversity, and a third group with relatively little genetic diversity.  Of
these three groups the third is by far the largest.  Everybody whose recent
ancestors originated outside of Africa, some 7 billion people, have relatively
low genetic diversity.  The second group, those of moderate genetic diversity,
consists of the vast majority of the roughly one billion people whose recent
ancestors originated in Africa.  The last group, those with high genetic
diversity, number only about a million and consist of members of the Pygmy and
Khoisan.  The scale of this difference is really rather astonishing.  If you
were to take two people at random from the low diversity group halfway around
the world from each other, say a Norwegian and a Navajo or an Indonesian and a
Spaniard, and you compared the similarity of their DNA, and then you did the
same for two Khoisan people living 100 miles apart, you would find that the DNA
between the two Khoisan people has 20% more differences than the DNA between
the Norwegian and the Navajo or the Indonesian and the Spaniard.  Most of the
human population descended from a group that underwent two major population
bottlenecks, one of which seems to have been particularly severe.  During this
bottleneck, the population that expanded out of Africa seems to have been
reduced at one point to a few tens of thousands of individuals, or possibly
even as few as a few thousand.  Another, less severe, bottleneck seems to have
occurred somewhat earlier when humanity was still in Africa and accounts for the
reduced genetic diversity of most of the African population.  What exactly
these events were has been the subject of some speculation.  A leading theory
of some time was that most of humanity died off in the aftermath of an eruption
of a supervolcano in Indonesia 75,000 years ago, though more recent evidence
has cast doubt on this hypothesis.  But at any rate both these events occurred
after the Pygmies and Khoisan split from the rest of humanity likely more than
100,000 years ago, so these groups have retained a much higher genetic
diversity.

Well, I told you that there are five language families in Africa, and we've now
seen the Afroasiatic, Niger-Congo, Pygmy, and Khoisan.  But there is one more
which we will not look at until a later episode.  This is the Indonesian
language family which is present in Madagascar.  Perhaps surprisingly, the
people of Madagascar are a mix of native Africans and Indonesians who 1500
years ago migrated some 5000 miles west.  As Jared Diamond put it, it's as
surprising as if Christopher Columbus had crossed the ocean blue and when he
got to the Bahamas, he had discovered that Swedes had been living there for a
millennium.  As such, culturally the astronomy of Madagascar belongs more
properly with the astronomy of Oceania which I'll cover in a later episode.

Okay, so with that survey of the geography and people of Africa we can now dive
into the astronomy proper a little bit more.  As I mentioned at the outset, the
history of the oldest astronomy is necessarily a history of African astronomy,
so it should be no surprise that the oldest artifact which is plausibly
astronomical in character is African.  This is a bone found in modern day
Eswatini called the Lebombo bone.  The Lebombo bone dates back around 43 to 44
thousand years ago and is what is called a tally stick.  Tally sticks are some
of the oldest human artifacts around and are bones with a series of notches in
them that appear to have been used, as the name implies, as an aid for
counting.  Tally sticks have fairly regular notches grooved into them,
suggesting that they were made deliberately, rather than just random notches
that might have come about when someone was carving up some meat.  The Lebombo
bone is the oldest definite tally stick and it has 29 notches grooved into it.
A careful analysis of these notches suggests that the notches were made with
different tools, which in turn implies that they were probably made at
different times rather than all at once.  As I mentioned in the last episode,
anytime you see an artifact with the number 29 it's maybe not definitive
evidence that the artifact is astronomical in nature, but it is certainly
wriggling its eyebrows suggestively since this is roughly the number of days
from new moon to new moon.

There is a younger, perhaps more sophisticated artifact, called the Ishango
bone, that was discovered in the modern day Democratic Republic of Congo.  This
tally stick is about 20,000 years old and has three columns of tally marks, one
with 48 tallies, and the other two with 60 tallies apiece.  The columns then
seem to be grouped into a series of smaller subdivisions, but what the meaning
of these divisions is is not obvious.  Some scholars have pointed to the number
60 that appears twice as being evidence of an astronomical connection since
this is roughly the number of days in two lunar months, but at least to me the
connection seems forced.  Others have pointed to the groupings of the tallies
in the third row, which are 19, 17, 13, and 11, which are all the prime numbers
between 10 and 20.  But this seems to be the sort of artifact that a
sufficiently motivated scholar can massage whatever explanation they want to
fit the data.  Almost certainly the original purpose of this artifact has been
lost to time.

Well the next oldest examples of interest in the heavens in Africa comes from
the rock art of the Khoisan, the oldest examples of which dates back around
26,000 years, long enough ago that Polaris was once again the north star.
These paintings generally depict groups of people, usually drawn in a highly
elongated way, along with animals.  But among some of these paintings there are
celestial bodies, particularly the Sun and Moon.  And some even appear to
depict comets or meteors, drawn with a dot surrounded by a halo and possessing
a long tail.  Though as always with the oldest artifacts, there are always
alternative interpretations.  In this case it's also been suggested that the
comet-like shapes that appear in some of these paintings is in fact a depiction
of a trance state.

Moving to a somewhat more recent set of artifacts, the Sahara has a number of
megaliths that have an astronomical connection similar to the megaliths of
Europe.  Now I titled this episode the astronomy of both Saharan and
Sub-Saharan Africa because the Sahara wasn't always the desolate deserted
Sahara we know today.  Due to oscillations in the Earth's orbit, the Sahara, or
at least the region that the Sahara occupies today, alternates between a desert
state and a wetter state that can support grassland.  Around the end of the
last ice age, the Sahara began to transition to this wetter state, which peaked
in moisture at around 6000 BC.  After this point the region gradually became
drier, and by 2500 BC was closer to its present state.  But even towards the
end of this period, the region seems to have been able to support human life
and most of the megaliths date from between 3000 to 2000 BC.  Many of these
megaliths are accompanied by skeletons and so are presumably funerary in
nature, which would make them similar to the megaliths in Europe.  The vast
majority of these megaliths are in the western end of the desert, with another
cluster in modern day Chad, though some kinds of monuments are distributed
across the entire region.

There are around 10,000 megaliths in the Sahara, and scholars of these
megaliths have grouped them into 40 broad classes, which is quite a lot so I
won't detail them all exhaustively.  But to list a few of the more common
kinds, one is a mound of earth or stone called a tumulus with a line of stones
at one end.  Another is a mound of earth or stone in a crescent shape, and
similarly there are tumuli in a V shape consisting of two relatively straight
arms of stone.  One of the more complex kinds of megaliths are what are called
keyhole monuments where there is a tumulus surrounded by two concentric rings
which are then connected to each other by a passageway.

As with European megaliths, the orientation of Saharan megaliths is not random.
The builders of the Saharan megaliths had a strong preference to orient their
structures to the east just like their European counterparts.  But different
kinds of monuments have different distributions in orientation.  Some of these,
like crescent monuments, were very deliberately built oriented towards the east
since there is an extremely narrow distribution of orientations.  The rare
exceptions that were built facing west generally have female skeletons present
unlike the vast majority of monuments with male skeletons, which suggests that
the builders oriented the tombs of men towards the east and the tombs of women
towards the west, at least in some cultures.  There is also substantial
regional variation in the ratio of male skeletons to female skeletons present
in these monuments.  In the central parts of the Sahara male skeletons are
predominant, but female skeletons are still frequent, around 22% of the total.
But in the western ranges of the Sahara the distribution shifts to almost
exclusively male with women making up only 0.6% of the skeletons found buried
at these crescent monuments.  Other kinds of monuments, like the tumulus with a
line of stones, seem to have built without too much thought to their
orientation since they have a very broad distribution of orientations with a
slight bias towards south if anything.  But most types of megaliths in the
Sahara do seem to have been built with a particular orientation in mind.  One
of the interesting features of the range of the distribution of orientations is
that while they fall towards the east with some scatter, it is rare that any
structures are oriented beyond the position of sunrise on the summer or winter
solstices, and even rarer that they exceed the position of the lunar
standstills.

Megaliths are also present south of the Sahara, though less is known about
these monuments.  It is probably the case that the desertification of the
Sahara led to Saharan monuments being better preserved than Sub-Saharan
monuments, and probably more importantly, easier to discover since there is no
vegetation to obscure their presence.  And in fact because there are basically
no trees in the Sahara, many of the Saharan monuments have been studied using
satellite imagery from Google Earth.

Interestingly the preference for burial sites to face east extends even further
south to the Khoisan peoples in southern Africa.  Anthropologists who have
studied their burial practices have found that, although there's some diversity
in funerary practices among the different nations, the general preference is to
bury the dead facing the east and almost all of the other cultures who don't,
bury their dead the other way, facing west.  When asked by anthropologists why
they oriented the dead in the way they did, some groups like the Gwa said that
the direction that the face was looking would be the direction that the ghost
of the deceased would start walking.  By orienting it towards the setting Sun,
the ghost could join the other ancestors who had also walked in that direction.
Among the Basotho the deceased was buried in a crouching position facing east
because the god Modimo was associated with the rising sun, and by facing that
direction they would be ready to spring to action at once when the call of
Modimo came.  But other groups, such as the Naron, simply said that it was
their custom to orient the dead towards the east but did not know of any
rationale as to why.  In the rare examples of where the dead are not oriented
east-west, the exception seems to prove the rule.  Among some of the
northernmost Kung the dead are buried north-south, but care is taken that the
deceased is put on their left side so that their face is still pointed east.
And incidentally, among the Tswana and Sotho the association of the east with
the dead is so strong that people avoid sleeping with their head towards the
east.

Well, this is perhaps a nice transition from the astronomy of ancient African
civilizations to more recent practices.  Without written records there is not
too much more we can say about ancient African civilizations, so we'll skip
ahead now to the astronomy practiced in Africa from the late 19th century
onwards when the first European colonizers and later anthropologists began to
keep records on African cultural practices.  Now I'm actually skipping over
quite a bit of interesting astronomy that takes place in the Sahel during the
late middle ages, particularly in Timbuktu, but this astronomy was more
associated with the arrival of Islam in the region so I'll save it for a future
episode when we go into the astronomy of the Islamic Golden Age.

Now as with all civilizations, the civilizations of Africa have identified
constellations in the sky.  But given that there are some 2000 distinct ethnic
groups in Africa I can only give a small sampling of the ways that they read
the stars.  But there are a couple of features that are unique to the African
sky relative to the European sky, particularly for peoples at equatorial
latitudes or further south.  There, certain features that are very prominent in
the northern hemisphere like the Big Dipper, are either less prominent because
they are low on the horizon or are not visible at all.  Instead the more
striking stars and asterisms of the southern hemisphere play a more prominent
role.  In particular the stars of Crux, the southern cross, and Centauri, the
Centaur are among the more important features of the sky, along with the Large
and Small Magellanic clouds, which aren't visible at all north of the Tropic of
Cancer.

Among the peoples who speak Setswana, a Bantu language in southern Africa, the
Large Magellanic Cloud is called Tlala, which means "famine" and the Small
Magellanic Cloud is called Kgora, which means "plenty."  In this region if
there have been poor rains, the atmosphere will be dustier and the Small
Magellanic Cloud will be obscured.  Then the harvests will be poor and only the
Large Magellanic Cloud, famine, will be observed.  But if the rains are good
the atmosphere will be less dusty and the Small Magellanic Cloud, plenty, will
be visible.

Another feature of the sky at equatorial and more southern latitudes is that
the center of the Milky Way appears much higher on the sky, passing overhead at
around 29 degrees of latitude south.  Around the equator, the Milky Way appears
to sort of swirl about the sky, pivoting between two points.  Consequently, the
Tabwa or Lungu people who live in the eastern reaches of the Democratic
Republic of Congo, called the Milky Way "kipinda busiku," which means "bow of
the night," with the word "kipinda" having an association with bending in
tension like the string of a hunting bow or a ladle swirling around a pot of
millet beer.  Since the Milky Way is always prominent in the sky it is used as
a timekeeping mechanism during the night, unlike northern cultures who
generally use the circumpolar stars like the Big Dipper or Cassiopeia.

Another prominent feature of the African sky is the constellation Orion and the
nearby Pleiades.  Since this group of stars roughly falls along the celestial
equator it is easily seen by peoples at all latitudes.  The association of
Orion with hunting seems to be fairly common, not unique to the western canon.
The Tswana saw the three stars of Orion's sword representing three dogs chasing
three pigs, represented by the three stars of Orion's belt.  The Khoisan also
read Orion as a hunting scene.  The hunter is the star Archenar, which is some
distance away in the constellation Eridanus.  The three stars that form Orion's
belt represent three zebras that the hunter is trying to kill.  He has fired an
arrow represented by Orion's sword, but the arrow has missed the zebras.
Beyond the zebras is the star Betelgeuse, which is a lion and off to the side
the Pleiades represent the hunter's six wives.  In the Khoisan's view, the
hunter is perhaps not a shining role model to look up to even he is literally
shining and you are literally looking up to him.  Having missed the zebras, the
hunter is too afraid to retrieve his arrow due to the lion.  But he is also too
embarrassed to return to his wives without any food, so he spends his days
skulking off in the distance.

More generally, among the Khoisan, the stars are seen as being animals or
people from earlier times, similar to the view promoted by Marcus Manilius that
I talked about in Episode 27 that the Milky Way was composed of the souls of
honorable men, most of which in his view happened to be Romans.  Similar
beliefs among the Xhosa led to a taboo against pointing at the sky.  In the
Xhosa culture it is disrespectful to point at an elder, and this extends to
deceased elders, so people do not point at a grave, nor do they point to the
sky.  Instead if they do need to point a star out, they will bend their finger
and point with their knuckle.

The stars around Orion also seem to mirror social life among the Xhosa as they
do among the Khoisan.  During the evenings around harvest time, Sirius and
Canopus, the two brightest stars in the night sky are visible low on the
western horizon right next to each other, and the Xhosa gave them the names
"the suitor on the left" and "the suitor on the right."  The arrangement of
stars was interpreted as a household.  The Xhosa are polygynous, so a man would
have multiple wives, but among them, two held special significance.  The first
is the man's first wife, who is also called the "inkosikazi," or principal
wife.  The second is the "umfazi wasekunene," or the "right-hand wife."  The
rest of the man's wives, called "qadi," would be subordinate to one of these
two wives who would jointly manage the household.  The stars Sirius and Canopus
were taken to represent these two wives of the household, and the surrounding
stars the other wives in the household.

As to the origin of the stars there is a wide diversity of explanations.  Among
the Zulu of southeastern Africa the word for star is "inkanyezi" which is also
the word for firefly.  In one tale the night sky is dark because the heavens
have accumulated the smoke from all the fires that have ever been lit and some
of the sparks from these fires persist in the sky as the stars.  Another tale
from the San has it that when the Sun goes to bed in the west at night, he
pulls a blanket over himself to keep warm, but the blanket is old and has holes
in it, producing the stars.

Well, in addition to these stories, there are a wide variety of more general
creation stories across Africa.  Again, with some 2000 ethnicities I can only
briefly sample a few of them, and as with the Greek myths I talked about way
back in Episode 7, there are no canonical versions of these stories.  Different
people will tell them their own way so many of these stories have a number of
variants.  Oftentimes the stories that get recorded by anthropologists have
been a number of distinct stories that they have heard that have all sort of
been smooshed together.

One version of the Zulu creation myth goes like this: One day the god iNkosi,
which simply means Chief, saw that a young man was making trouble.  This time
the young man was riding iNkosi's favorite white horse, but this was far from
the first time that this young man had been making mischief.  INkosi decided
that enough was enough and resolved to send the man down to Earth so that he
would cause no more problems in the heavens.  INkosi ordered that a hole be cut
in the sky and that an intestine be tied around the waist of the young man.
INkosi then lowered him down to the Earth.  When the man set foot on Earth, the
man saw that he still had an umbilical cord attached to him, so he found a reed
and cut the cord off.  A month passed and iNkosi decided to check to see how
the man was doing, so he opened the hole back up and looked down.  To his
dismay, the man was sitting under a banana tree looking very thin and weak.
INkosi asked himself, "What is wrong with my son?  Was there no food and water
for him on Earth?"  INkosi then realized that the man was very young and was
all alone.  So he decided that he would give the man a companion and called
upon the most beautiful woman in the heavens and said to her, "Today you must
leave the heavens and go down to the Earth to live with your man so that he
might have somebody with him who will make him happy."  INkosi then tied the
intestine around the woman's waist and lowered her to the Earth through the
hole in the sky.  When the woman touched the Earth, the man woke up and was
astonished with what he saw.  He said, "I have never seen anything so beautiful
since I came to this place.  This woman must have been a gift from my father,
for who else can give such beautiful gifts?"  Then he took a reed and cut the
umbilical cord of the woman, too.  After this, iNkosi pulled the cord up to
heaven and sealed the hole shut so that the people on Earth could not look up
into the heavens, and the gods in the heavens could not look down upon the
Earth and see the manner in which the people multiplied.  This is why the Zulu
call themselves the Zulu, because in that language the word "Zulu" means
"heavens" or "sky," and this is where they came from.

One thing to note about African creation stories in general of which this one
is an example, is that they are focused mostly on the creation of the human
race rather than the creation of the universe itself.  Being polytheistic, most
of the peoples, particularly in southern Africa had a rather deistic conception
of the creation of the universe.  Many have a conception that there was some
great god who created the universe at one point in the past, but once his work
had been completed he more or less left the universe to its own devices.  Given
his apathy towards humanity, generally the peoples of southern Africa had only
a vague interest in him in return.  Their religious practices centered far more
heavily around other deities that took a more active interest in the lives of
humans.  This kind of thing is by no means unique to Africa.  We see it as a
prominent feature of Greek mythology, too.  The Greeks had their own vague
creation myth, but the Greeks almost never interacted with the primordial gods.
The gods that the Greeks interacted with on a day-to-day basis were several
generations removed from the original gods and had associations with things
that were more practically relevant like the goddess Diana to hunting or
Aphrodite to love.

An exception to this comes from the people known variously as the Bushongo or
Songora, who are a Bantu people of central Africa.  They have a creation story
that addresses the creation of the universe itself.  One version of it,
recounted by Jarita Holbrook goes like this: 

> In the beginning it was dark and there was nothing but water.  The god Bumba
> was alone.  One day, Bumba was in terrible pain.  He retched and strained and
> vomited up the sun.  After that light spread over everything.  The heat of
> the sun dried up the water until the black edges of the world began to show.
> Black sandbanks and reefs could be seen.  But there were no living things.
> Bumba vomited up the moon and then the stars and after that the night and its
> light also.  Still Bumba our Creator was in pain.  He strained once again and
> from his mouth nine living creatures came forth: the leopard named Koy Bumba
> and Pongo Bumba the crested eagle; the crocodile, Ganda Bumba, and one little
> fish named Yo; next, old Kono Bumba, the tortoise, and Tsetse, the lightning,
> swift, deadly, and beautiful like the leopard; then the white heron, Nyanyi
> Bumba; also one beetle; and the goat named Budi.  The creatures themselves
> then created all the creatures.  The heron created all the birds of the air.
> The crocodile made the serpents and the iguana.  The goat produced every
> beast with horns.  Yo, the small fish, brought forth all the fish of all the
> seas and waters.  The beetle created insects.  Then the serpents in their
> turn made grasshoppers, and the iguana made the creatures without horns.
> 
> Last of all came forth men.  There were many men, but only one was white like
> Bumba.  His name was Loko Yima.

> Then the three sons of Bumba said they would finish the world.  The first,
> Nyonye Ngana, made the white ants, but he was not equal to the task and died
> of it.  The ants, however, thankful for life and being, went searching for
> black earth in the depths of the world and covered the barren sands to bury
> and honor their creator.
> 
> Chonganda, the second son, brought forth a marvelous living plant from which
> all the trees and grasses and flowers and plants in the world have sprung.
> The third son, Chedi Bumba, wanted something different, but for all his
> trying made only the bird called the kite.
> 
> Of all the creatures, Tsetse, lightning, was the only troublemaker.  She
> stirred up so much trouble that Bumba chased her into the sky.  Then mankind
> was without fire until Bumba showed the people how to draw fire out of trees.
> "There is fire in every tree," he told them and showed them how to make the
> fire drill and liberate it.  Sometimes today Tsetse still leaps down and
> strikes the Earth and causes damage.
> 
> When at last the work of creation was finished, Bumba walked through the
> peaceful villages and said to the people, "Behold these wonders.  They belong
> to you."  Thus from Bumba, the Creator, the First Ancestor, came forth all
> the wonders that we see and hold and use and all the brotherhood of beasts
> and men.

Some scholars have noticed the detail that one of the men is described as being
white in color, as is the god Bumba himself, and have suggested that this may
imply that the story developed later, or at least was influenced later on,
after the Bushongo people had encountered European colonizers.  There is also a
rather tantalizing correspondence between the beginning of the story with the
creation story of in the Book of Genesis.  But unfortunately because the
original records come to us through Europeans, there are no records of what the
story looked like prior to the arrival of Europeans, so it's hard to tell if
these elements were original to the Bushongo or adaptations that came about
after their encounters with Europeans, and in particular, Christian
missionaries.

Well, transient phenomena also did not escape the attention of African peoples.
Comets, in particular, were noticed and as with virtually every other
civilization, were considered to be very bad omens indeed.  Particularly
notable was the Great Comet of 1882 which initially appeared at very southern
latitudes and was carefully observed in the Southern Hemisphere.  The comet was
rather remarkable because it belonged to a class of comets called "sungrazers"
which come within one solar radius of the Sun's surface and consequently get
exceedingly bright, this one being visible in the daytime despite being so
close to the Sun.  Since the comet appeared around the time that European
colonizers made it into the central Congo region, the Tabwa people later
interpreted it as an omen of the colonizer's arrival, and the resulting
violence, famines, and epidemics that plagued them.

There are records of an even earlier comet sighted by the Zulu in the late
summer of 1827 which influenced the trajectory of the Zulu Kingdom.  The Zulu
Kingdom grew in the early 19th century as a man named Shaka, one of the
illegitimate sons of the Chief of the Zulus at the time, began to grow his clan
of just a few thousand men to a massive army that conquered a substantial
portion of southeastern Africa.  Over the course of the early 1810s until his
death in 1828 King Shaka instituted major changes in the organization and
tactics used by the Zulu army.  King Shaka emphasized strong discipline and
high mobility of the army and seems to have changed the nature of warfare in
southern Africa from a more ritualistic, bloodless style of warfare to one in
which absolute conquest was the overriding objective.  His impact on African
warfare and politics is such that it has been seen as analogous to Napoleon's
impact on European warfare and politics.

Well, in late summer of 1827 a comet appeared in the sky, roughly coinciding
with the death of King Shaka's beloved mother, Nandi, likely from dysentery,
though anti-Shaka factions pushed a long running rumor that the king himself
had in fact stabbed his own mother to death.  Either way, according to the
surviving records, King Shaka ensured that his mother's death was not merely a
personal tragedy.  At her funeral, the people lamented Nandi's death and threw
burning wood into the air at the comet that seemed to have brought her death
about.  Being of the highest royalty, members of her personal coterie were
executed so that they could serve her in the afterlife.  King Shaka then
decreed a year of mourning during which he forbade anyone from planting crops,
drinking milk, then one of the major sources of calories, and having sexual
relations between a husband and wife.  If a woman was found to be pregnant
during this year she was executed alongside her husband.  In all, it's
estimated that around 7000 people died, though it should also be said that the
original sources of these events are from European colonists who, needless to
say, had their own biases, so there is probably some level of exaggeration.  At
any rate, this enforced period of mourning did not endear him to the population
and over the course of this year anti-Shaka factions led by his half-brothers
were able to gain power and ultimately assassinated the king in 1828.  But
after a brief power struggle that ensued, the half-brother who ended up on top,
King Dingane, turned out to be an even crueller leader than Shaka but lacked
the military and political acumen that King Shaka had to make up for it.
During his reign the Zulu Kingdom began to fragment as rebel chiefs broke away
and this, in turn, weakened the Zulu Empire as they began to come into conflict
with the Dutch Voortrekkers that had begun migrating northward into Zulu
territory to escape British rule in South Africa.  This conflict then came to a
head during the Battle of Blood River which was a complete catastrophe for the
Zulu.  480 Voortrekkers battled some 15,000 Zulu soldiers and in the end more
than 3000 Zulu were killed with no deaths of the Voortrekkers.

But I am getting away from astronomy, so let's move to a less bloody but still
controversial topic: calendars.  The Zulu calendar is fairly representative of
the calendars of many of the peoples of Africa, so it is a good place to start.
The Zulu, along with most other Bantu peoples and the Khoisan, observed a lunar
calendar where new months were marked at the evening when a crescent was
visible after new moon.  The new year, however, was not determined
astronomically, but officially arrived when the first big rains fell, usually
around September.  These rains would mark the time for ploughing and preparing
for the next agricultural year.  Nevertheless, although the new year began on
the first day of rains, the Zulu, along with most other peoples of southern
Africa, would prepare for it by watching for the heliacal rising of the
Pleiades, which would typically precede the first rains by couple of weeks.
This would allow them time to prepare for the new year.  Now, as with any lunar
calendar, there is the problem that 12 lunar months are 354 days long, but the
year is 365 days long, so every now and again you need to add in an intercalary
month.  The Zulu have no formal system to determine whether or not to add an
intercalary month for the year.  Instead the people simply negotiate among
themselves to decide.  This kind of ad-hoc addition of intercalary months is
quite common among societies with lunar calendars, but what is somewhat unique
to the Zulu is that these kinds of negotiations are not done in a hierarchical
way.  Among the early Babylonians, for instance, intercalary months were added
in an ad hoc way, but the decision was made by a small group of elites, the
priests.  But among the Zulu there is no special class of people who make this
decision, it's done in a decentralized way.

This principle of negotiating the calendar is taken to an extreme by the Mursi,
an Afroasiatic people who live around the border between Ethiopia and Kenya.
The Mursi have a calendar with 13 lunar months and are all very familiar with
it.  The first month of the year is called "gamwe," and is the only one that
has its own name.  After that the months are simply called "bergu 1," "bergu
2," and so on through "bergu 12," "bergu" just meaning "year."  So "bergu 2"
means "the year is two months old."  Even very young children are able to tell
you the character of the months, what kind of work gets done in each month,
what kind of festivals there are, what the weather is like, and so on.  There
are two main landmarks in the year.  The first landmark is the onset of the
first "big rains," which in these northern latitudes come around late March or
early April.  The Mursi live alongside a river called the Omo, and the second
landmark comes six months later, when the upstream snow melt causes the river
to flood.  At this point the Mursi bifurcate.  The women move to the banks of
the river and cultivate crops there whereas the men move away from the Omo with
the cattle.  Knowledge of what time of the year it is is critical.  If the
Mursi women sow seeds too early in the year, later floods will come and wash
the seedlings away.  But if they wait too long and sow too late, the ground
will have dried up and the seeds won't sprout.

Now because the Mursi year has 13 lunar months, which is 383 and a half days,
but the solar year has only 365 and a quarter days, there is a problem.  Most
cultures with a lunar calendar resolve this problem with intercalation ---
every now and again they explicitly add in an extra month into the calendars to
get the months to line up with the seasons.  But the Mursi instead solve this
problem with what might be described as "fuzzing."  The Mursi are quite
insistent that every year has 13 months in it, but if you ask someone what
month it is right now, you will not get a straight answer.  They will reply
something to the effect of, "well, some say that it is Bergu 8, but others say
that it is Bergu 9."  Everyone makes up their own mind as to what month it is
and makes their case to their neighbors, but not everybody will be convinced.
Ultimately, people simply agree to disagree about the month.

So then, how do you determine for yourself what month you think it is?  The
Mursi have a number of signs that they look to, but nothing is considered
definitive.  Some of these signs are seasonal events, like rains or hot days.
But others are celestial.  A few of the Mursi take a particular interest in
regularly observing the heavens and will mark things like the heliacal rising
of stars or the positions of sunrise and sunset, and they will marshal that as
evidence that it is one month or another.  In particular, one of the more
important signs that they will look for is if the Sun is in what they call one
of the two "houses," that is, when it rises at its northernmost or southernmost
points, which corresponds to the summer and winter solstices.  But, as in
modern day Western society, there is no special social status accorded to
people who regularly observe the heavens, and any celestial markers they
observe are just taken to be one piece of evidence among many during
discussions about what month it is.

To Westerners, this ambiguity in the calendar might be rather perplexing, but
it really comes out of a much older and more intuitive understanding of time
than we have today in the West.  Today, we in the West think of time in very
precise, mechanical terms.  If you close your eyes and think of the word
"time," you probably conjure up in your head an image of the second hand on a
stopwatch ticking away.  In the modern view, time is a progression of regularly
repeating instants; a vast, impersonal, and mostly uninteresting canvas upon
which the events of the world play out.  But every one of these instants is
equal to any other.  Earlier, pre-modern notions of time are more event based.
And, to get somewhat philosophical, this is still true today, it's just that
the events we consider are cold, impersonal things like the oscillations of a
cesium atom or vibrations of a quartz crystal.  But pre-modern conceptions of
time generally took it for granted that these events had to have some relevance
to one's life.  And because these events are often not discrete things, the
beginnings and ends of time periods can be a little bit fuzzy in the eyes of
modernity.  Nevertheless, this older conception of time is so intuitive that we
still have it around today.  For instance, you might want to go apple picking
some time during apple season.  But when is apple season?  Well, you have some
idea --- the middle of October probably falls within apple season but early
July does not.  But what about early September?  Late August?  December?  The
boundaries are a little fuzzy.  Or suppose you say to a friend that you heard a
loud noise outside that woke you up in the middle of the night.  When is the
middle of the night?  It's not midnight exactly.  Everyone has some notion of
it, 3am would certainly count, but again the boundaries are a little bit fuzzy.
If the noise woke you up at 5am, would that be the middle of the night?
Probably not, but 4am?  Well, perhaps.  Around the boundaries, some people will
call it one way, others another, just as the Mursi do.  And this kind of
fuzziness is still with us with one of the most fundamental cycles we
experience: the seasons.  Everyone knows what the seasons are, but when do they
begin or end?  In modern times we've tried to delineate it with specific days,
but even here there are conflicting definitions.  The astronomical seasons are
set by the solstices and equinoxes.  Summer starts on the summer solstice,
sometime around June 21.  But the meteorological seasons begin from the start
of the calendar months, so summer starts on June 1.  Then the solar seasons
begin on the cross-quarter days, halfway between the solstices and equinoxes,
so summer would begin on May 1.  In fact, this is the older definition that was
used, which is why the old term midsummer, think Shakespeare's A Midsummer
Night's Dream, refers to a time around the summer solstice, even though in the
astronomical definition, this is the *start* of summer, not the middle of it.
At any rate, this confusion comes about from trying to squeeze a messy,
imprecise pattern of natural events into a rigorous 365 and a quarter day
annual calendar.  But we all have the experience of walking outside one day
maybe in early June, maybe a little later, when the sun is blazing, the weather
is hot, the flowers have faded and everything is green and we think, "Yes,
today is the first day of summer."

The Borana people somewhat southeast of the Mursi also have a rather unique
calendar.  Like the Mursi, there is a small fraction of people who take an
interest in observing the heavens and are considered to be experts in
astronomy, called "ayantu."  And as with the Mursi and the modern day West,
there is no special social status for this skill.  Generally, knowledge of
astronomy is passed down through the generations from father to son.  The
Borana have 12 lunar months, and as with most lunar calendars they mark the new
month at the first sighting of the lunar crescent after new moon.  Each month
has either 29 or 30 days, but only the first 27 days get unique names.  Once
they get to the 28th day, they start over again and repeat the first two or
three names.  The ayantu mark the days and months by observing which stars or
asterisms the Moon is next to when it rises.  Since the Borana live very close
to the equator, the stars rise almost exactly vertically, and looking at what
stars are to the left or right of the Moon essentially tells you the right
ascension of the Moon.  Some months will have 29 days and others 30, and the
Borana will decide whether or not to add the extra day when they see that the
Moon has gotten too far out of step with the corresponding stars that it is
supposed to rise with towards the end of the month.  Similarly, the ayantu will
sometimes add an intercalary month when they see that the day that a
particular month begins on has gotten too far out of step with the
corresponding stars it rises with at the beginning of a month.  So the Borana
calendar is a rare example of a luni-stellar calendar where time is kept by
keeping track of the position of both the Moon and the stars, rather than the
much more common lunisolar calendar that most other civilizations use.  So the
Borana are rather unique in that they do not consider the position of the Sun
at all in their timekeeping.  Instead, thanks to their proximity to the
equator, it is easier, and probably more accurate, to rely on the stars.

Well, there is much more to say about the astronomy of sub-Saharan Africa, but
this episode is late enough as it is, so we will have to leave the region
behind for now and travel up the Nile.  Next month I will return to the promise
I made two months ago and talk about the astronomy of one of the world's oldest
civilizations: Egypt.  I hope you'll join me then.  Until the next full moon,
good night and clear skies.

## Additional references

* Ruggles, Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy
* Holbrook, African Cultural Astronomy
* Alcock, Venus Rising
