---
categories: episode
date: '2024-01-29'
description: This month we turn to the astronomy of China in the early Imperial Era.
  We look at the way that the Emperor's astronomers were organized within the imperial
  bureaucracy and then walk through the three significant cosmological theories of
  the era.
keywords:
- astronomy
- history
layout: episode
number: 38
title: The Organization of Heaven & Earth
---

## Transcript

Good evening, and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon.  My
name is Joe Antognini.

Last month we started our tour of the astronomy of ancient China by looking at
the place of astronomy in Chinese society, particularly elite society, and then
turned to the oldest written record of astronomical activity we have in China,
the story of Hsi and Ho.  This month I wanted to turn to the cosmological
systems that developed in the early Imperial period along with some general
characteristics of the calendars, which were, after all, one of the main
reasons that astronomers commanded such a high rank in the Chinese state.

But before we do get into these early cosmological systems, I wanted to say
just a few more words about how the role of astronomy in Chinese society
evolved during the Imperial period.  Now, in last month's episode I talked at
some length how astronomy in China was intimately tied to the state.  The
emperor funded a coterie of astronomers and gave them a mandate to observe the
heavens.  As a civilized activity it flowed forth from the emperor, just like
all the other fruits of civilization.  This relationship between astronomy and
the state goes back to as far as we can tell in Chinese history.  By the time
the earliest relevant records start to appear in the Chou Dynasty this
relationship not only exists, but seems to have been regarded as an ancient
practice.

But in the ancient period, emperors were on the whole pretty weak, and Chinese
political theory still hadn't come to a consensus, whether voluntarily or not,
as to what the role of the emperor should be.  But after Ying Zheng conquered
the other five kingdoms of China and thereby brought about the start of the
Imperial Era, over the centuries, with some ups and downs, the Emperor's Court
expanded and became more formalized.  Now, in the two millennia that Imperial
China spanned, the precise details of the organization of the astronomers
within the imperial bureaucracy varied.  The name of the unit in the imperial
org chart for the astronomers changed fairly regularly for instance, but often
had a fairly literal name, something that might translate as "Astronomical
Bureau" or "Astronomical Directorate."  But there were a few common features of
the organization that generally persisted over all these years.  The first was
that being within the Emperor's Astronomical Bureau was always a high status
position, especially so for those at the head.  A corollary of this was that
during the reign of most of the emperors this organization was independent of
any other departments within the bureaucracy.  The head of the Astronomical
Bureau, or whatever its name of the day was, would report directly to the
emperor, rather than being managed by some intermediary.  The 19th century
Austrian sinologist Franz Kühnert wrote tongue in cheek,

> Probably another reason why many Europeans consider the Chinese such
> barbarians is on account of the support they give to their astronomers ---
> people regarded by our cultivated Western mortals as completely useless.
> Yet there they rank with Heads of Departments and Secretaries of State.
> What frightful barbarism!

The department itself was headed up by two individuals.  The more important of
the two had the title of "Feng Hsiang Shih," which is usually translated as
"Imperial astronomer."  The Imperial astronomer was ultimately responsible for
reporting on the state of the heavens and setting the calendar, which included
marking the divisions of the four seasons by measuring the solstices and
equinoxes.  This was the most prestigious position and was generally a
hereditary office, passed down from father to son.  The book the Chou Li, which
translates to "Record of the Rites of the Chou," written around the 2nd century
BC, describes the duties of the imperial astronomer as follows:

> He concerns himself with the [the sidereal revolution of Jupiter], the twelve
> months, the [hours of the day], the [week], and the positions of the [lunar
> mansions].  He distinguishes them and orders them so that he can make a
> general plan of the state of the heavens.  He takes observations of the sun
> at the winter and summer solstices, and of the moon at the spring and autumn
> equinoxes, in order to determine the succession of the four seasons.

The second most important position in the astronomical bureaucracy held the
title of "Pao Chang Shih," which is usually translated as "Imperial
Astrologer."  As the name implies, the Imperial Astrologer's role was more
focused on divining the implications that changes in the heavens had for
matters of state on earth, though, somewhat more prosaically, another
major responsibility of the Imperial Astrologer was to keep the astronomical
records.  The Chou Li describes his role like this:

> He concerns himself with the stars in the heavens, keeping a record of the
> changes and movements of the planets, the sun and the moon, in order to
> examine the movements of the terrestrial world, with the object of
> [prognosticating] good and bad fortune. He divides the territories of the
> nine regions of the empire in accordance with their dependence on particular
> celestial bodies. All the fiefs and principalities are connected with
> distinct stars, and from this their prosperity or misfortune can be
> ascertained. He makes prognostications, according to the twelve years (of the
> Jupiter cycle), of good and evil in the terrestrial world. From the colours
> of the five kinds of clouds,d he determines the coming of floods or drought,
> abundance or famine. From the twelve winds he draws conclusions about the
> state of harmony of heaven and earth, and takes note of the good or bad signs
> which result from their accord or disaccord. In general he concerns himself
> with the five kinds of phenomena, so as to warn the emperor to come to the
> aid of the government, and to allow for variations in the ceremonies
> according to the circumstances.

In addition to these two chief positions there were a couple of other roles of
note within the Astronomical Bureau.  There was the Shih Chen, which we might
translate to something like Imperial Meteorologist, whose focus was more on
keeping track of weather patterns, although this use of the term
"meteorological" somewhat resembles Aristotle's since it included other
transient phenomena in the heavens like comets or even eclipses.  There was
also the Chhieh Hu Shih, which we might translate to Imperial Timekeeper, and
was responsible for managing the water clocks.

To support all of this work, the Astronomical Bureau employed a staff of
hundreds of astronomers who specialized in various tasks, from being the ones
to actually make the observations to timekeeping, marking the calendar, doing
mathematical calculations, or making instruments.  Additionally the
Astronomical Bureau could make use of an observatory.  And what's more,
throughout much of Imperial China, the astronomers had not just one, but two
observatories at their disposal.  One of these observatories was located within
the imperial palace, and the other was some distance outside.  To ensure that
the data that the astronomers collected was trustworthy, data collected from
each observatory would be compared to the other, and only if the two
observations agreed would the data be recorded.  So we see from a relatively
early time that some amount of skepticism was applied to observational data in
Chinese science.

Now, while this was a good way to structure the data collection process to
reduce the chances of mistakes, like any system it was not infallible,
particularly when scientific fraud was involved.  By the 11th century AD the
standards within the Astronomical Bureau had become, shall we say, lax.  An
astronomer named Pheng Chheng was appointed to the post of Imperial Astronomer,
and was apparently the first Imperial Astronomer in some time to take his job
as an actual astronomer seriously.  As Pheng Chheng was taking stock of the
procedures of the astronomers he was now responsible for he became alarmed at
what he saw.  Apparently, rather than checking to see if the observations
between the two observatories agreed and rejecting data that did not, the two
observatories were just copying each others' records.  To make matters worse,
they generally did not even bother to make any observations at all.  To record
the positions of the planets they would just use a rough algorithm to calculate
where the planet should be, rather than observing it for themselves.  After
taking over, Pheng Chheng had six astronomers punished and tried to instill
better standards in the remaining astronomers, but apparently felt that he did
not make much progress.  His successor, Shen Kua, was another capable
astronomer and bemoaned the poor quality of the astronomers that were under
him.  To try to find astronomers who knew more about astronomy, he tried to get
the entrance exam to the imperial bureaucracy to incorporate more astronomy.
He did indeed succeeded in getting more astronomy questions added to the exam,
but to his dismay, the examiners themselves knew nothing about astronomy, so
they just graded the candidates on the quality of their prose rather than
whether or not their answers made any sense.

Now, one thing which should be mentioned is that while astronomy was a
prestigious occupation in Imperial China, probably more so than most other
cultures throughout history, it was by no means the most prestigious place you
could be in the Chinese bureaucracy.  From the early 1st century AD onward, the
top school for aspiring bureaucrats to study at was the Taixue, which is
usually translated to Imperial Academy.  Initially the Taixue offered only two
degrees, both in the classics, but around seven centuries later the university
had expanded and began to offer four more degrees.  One of these, called Ming
Suan, was in mathematics, and was the most relevant course of study for anyone
hoping to become an astronomer.  But the Ming Suan degree was by far the least
popular of the degrees offered at the Taixue, because students judged that it
was the least likely to lead to a high position in the bureaucracy.  After all,
even though the emperor employed hundreds of astronomers, the imperial
bureaucracy was vast, and the Astronomical Bureau was just a tiny sliver of the
overall organization.

That said, astronomy was not the only way that a graduate who held a degree in
Ming Suan could use their knowledge of mathematics.  Mathematics was needed for
the design of public works and in military engineering.  Merchants, of course,
needed some amount of mathematics, too.  But none of these occupations were as
prestigious as that of astronomer, and there were, in turn, many more
prestigious occupations than that which required no knowledge of mathematics at
all.

Now, a perhaps ironic consequence of the high status that astronomy held in
Chinese society throughout its long history is that it ended up limiting our
knowledge of it.  Thanks to its proximity to the Emperor and its importance for
assessing the state of the world and making predictions of what was to come in
matters of state, knowledge of astronomy was held as a state secret.  In fact,
the fundamental role that astronomers had in setting the calendar was seen as
one of the essential symbols of imperial power.  The nearest analog to this in
Western civilization is maybe the authority to mint coins with the image of the
monarch.  Just as a new Roman emperor would begin replacing the old coins that
bore the image of the face of his predecessor with new coins that had his own
visage on it, when there was dynastic upheaval in China and a new dynastic line
was established, one of the first things that the new emperor would do to
assert his authority would be to issue a new calendar.

If you recall back to Episode 26 when I talked about the relationship between
astrology and the Roman state, there are some parallels between the role that
astronomy played in both societies.  Particular omens could be seized upon by
rebels to rally support for their cause.  Due to this sensitivity, astronomical
knowledge was kept as a closely guarded secret.  A 10th century history called
the Chiu Thang Shu, or Old Book of Tang, described one of the orders that an
emperor issued to ensure that his astronomers would maintain appropriate
secrecy:

> In the twelfth month of the 5th year of the Khai-Chhéng reign-period (+840)
> an imperial edict was issued ordering that the observers in the imperial
> observatory should keep their business secret. ‘If we hear’, it said, ‘of any
> intercourse between the astronomical officials or their subordinates and
> officials of other government departments or miscellaneous common people, it
> will be regarded as a violation of security regulations which should be
> strictly adhered to. From now onwards, therefore, the astronomical officials
> are on no account to mix with civil servants and common people in general.
> Let the Censorate look to it.'

So in certain periods not only were astronomers forbidden from sharing
knowledge of astronomy with anyone outside the Astronomical Bureau, they were
not allowed to interact with them at all.  This secrecy has unfortunately
limited our present day understanding of what China's astronomers were up to
for all those centuries.  Astronomical texts and records were generally
restricted to government archives, and because only a relatively small number
of people needed to access them, there tended to be very few copies of these
works.  So, when there were accidents, or, more commonly purges after a
dynastic change, it was unfortunately easy for astronomical works to get lost
or destroyed.  By contrast the field of mathematics was much less sensitive.
The knowledge was more widespread and there were many more copies of the
relevant works.  Consequently, despite its lower status, the textual history of
Chinese mathematics is much more complete than it is for astronomy.

But one of the more important texts for the early history of Chinese astronomy
that did survive is called the Lushi Chunqiu, or Master Lu's Spring and Autumn
Annals.  The work was an attempt to compile a comprehensive collection of all
the knowledge of the day and is unusually long relative to the other Chinese
classics, totaling more than 100,000 words.  The work was written shortly
before the end of the Warring States Period and the establishment of the Qin
Dynasty.  You may recall from last episode that the first emperor of the Qin
Dynasty, Qin Shi Huang, was an ardent believer in the political power of ideas
and wanted intellectual life to be under his control.  As part of his project
to consolidate Chinese scholarship in his state, one of his officials, a man
named Lu Buwei, invited 3000 scholars to the court and asked that they write
down all their knowledge.  After the herculean task of compiling all their
knowledge had been completed, Lu Buwei displayed the finished book at the city
gate and offered a bounty of 1000 gold pieces to any scholar who could find
even a single error in the work.  And indeed, not a single error was found, at
least until the modern era, by which point the bounty had long since
disappeared.  But early texts that did survive like the Lushi Chunqiu were the
exception rather than the rule.

That said, however, the astronomical records themselves tended to fair better
than treatises on astronomy because on the whole there was less that could be
found to be objectionable by later emperors in them.  So the unusual status
that Chinese civilization gave to astronomy turned out to be a real boon for
all of humanity, because for centuries Chinese astronomers kept meticulous
records of the heavens, many of which do survive, and for large swaths of
history, these are the only records of what was going on in the heavens.  You
may recall from Episode 25 about the Star of Bethlehem that astronomers have
wondered whether or not the Star of Bethlehem could have been a supernova or a
comet.  Well, the only reliable astronomical records we have from this period
are Chinese and Korean, and Korean civilization was, in turn, heavily
influenced by its much larger neighbor to the west.  The oldest recorded
supernovae almost all come from Chinese records.  Over the centuries Chinese
astronomers noted around 20 events that we now know were supernovae, with the
oldest being recorded in 185 BC.

Well, at the root of all the prestige and mystery of astronomy in Chinese
society was the calendar.  The astrology and divination were important, of
course, but came later.  The original motivation that the Chinese had to study
the skies, as in every society, was to keep time.  Now, there was no single
calendar that the Chinese people observed for the three-odd millennia that we
have records.  As I mentioned earlier, one of the first things an upstart
emperor would do after overthrowing the previous emperor and setting up a new
dynasty in its place, was to establish a new calendar as a way of asserting his
authority.  So the details of the calendar changed over the centuries.  But
throughout this all there were a few general characteristics that these
calendars shared.  The first was that as far back as records go, it seems that
months began on the new moon.  Now, this is quite unusual for ancient
civilizations.  You'll recall that the Babylonians began their months close to
the new moon, but not right on it.  They began their month on the first evening
that the crescent moon was visible after the new moon.  This kind of a system
was far more common across societies and for good reason.  You can actually
tell when the new month has started just by looking at the moon.  You see the
moon disappear for a few days during the new moon, and then one evening, there
it is again, low on the horizon.  And the next month has started.  By contrast
starting the month on the new moon itself is quite a lot harder because you
can't actually see when the new moon is happening, so it requires a rather
sophisticated model of the phases of the moon to get it right.  For this reason
it's thought that originally, prior to records starting, the Chinese probably
began their months on the first evening that a crescent moon was visible, just
like almost everyone else.  But very early on Chinese astronomy had become
sophisticated enough that it could move from the easier to observe but somewhat
more irregular first visible crescent to the more difficult to observe but more
precisely defined new moon itself as the boundary between two months.

Now because the months of the calendar were defined in relation to the moon,
the Chinese then had the age old problem of any society with a lunar calendar.
The number of lunar months does not evenly fit into a solar year.  And,
particularly for an agricultural society this is a big problem, because the
main point of the calendar, the reason that establishing it brought so much
authority to the emperor, was that it set out times for planting and sowing.
Well, the crops don't really care what the moon is doing, they care about what
the Sun is doing.  So the Chinese solved this problem the usual way, by adding
in a 13th intercalary month when the months got too out of sync with the
seasons.

One of the main sources of variation in the different incarnations of the
Chinese calendar was when the year itself began.  The oldest records from
Ancient China indicate that the new year was originally marked around the
winter solstice, but it seems that different regions observed different customs
and upon various dynastic successions the new emperor would make official the
custom he was used to in his own land.  So the date of the new year bounced
between the autumnal equinox and vernal equinox as well.  Moreover, even if two
calendars were nominally targeting the same solstice or equinox they might
calculate the start of the new year in slightly different ways.  Some, like the
Zhuanxu calendar, would start the new year on the new moon closest to the
winter solstice.  Others, like the Yin calendar, would start the new year on
the first new moon after the winter solstice.  About a century into the Han
dynasty Sima Qian, who is better known as a historian but was also an
astronomer in the imperial court, convened a conference of astronomers to
reform the calendar, and in 104 BC Emperor Wu ordered the adoption of the Tai
Chu calendar.  This calendar defined the month containing the winter solstice
to be the eleventh month of the year, so the new year was typically the second
new moon after the winter solstice, unless the year had an intercalary month,
in which case it would be the third.  This convention has persisted now for
more than two millennia to the present day and the Chinese New Year is the
biggest holiday in modern China.  One of the features of this definition of the
new year is that this new moon is almost always the new moon that is closest to
the start of spring in Chinese culture.  Now here there is a bit of a
difference between Chinese convention and Western conventions, at least modern
Western conventions.  Today in the West we typically mark the transition
between seasons at the solstices or equinoxes.  So summer, at least
astronomical summer, formally begins on the summer solstice and lasts until the
autumnal equinox.  The Chinese convention, however, is for the seasons instead
to straddle the solstices and equinoxes.  So the vernal equinox marks the
middle of spring not the beginning, and the start of spring comes about a month
and a half earlier, around early February.  In fact much of Europe used to
follow this convention as well, particularly in the north, and we still retain
some vestiges of it.  The date of midsummer is the summer solstice, which is
today not the middle of summer but its start, but centuries ago was considered
to be the middle of summer, hence its name.

But of the various calendars in Ancient China, the oldest we know if is called
the Zhuanxu calendar, named after the legendary emperor Zhuanxu.  Supposedly
Zhuanxu introduced sacrifices to soil and grain to invoke a good harvest, in
addition to the traditional sacrifices to the ancestors.  These sacrifices to
soil and grain later came to have important political consequences during the
Warring States period in conjunction with the mandate of heaven.  One of the
justifications that rebelling kings made for their insurrection was that their
loyalty lay first and foremost to the soil and grain, rather than to the ruler
himself.  Well, the Zhuanxu calendar is said to have begun with a conjunction,
or at least some sort of gathering, of all seven planets in the constellation
of Yingshi at dawn on a day in early spring.  This would place its nominal
start date at February 13, 1953 BC.  The constellation of Yingshi corresponds
to the asterism called the Great Square of Pegasus in the West, which consists
of three stars in Pegasus and one star in Andromeda, and as the name implies,
forms a great square on the sky.  The Great Square is not nearly as famous as
the other main asterisms like the Big Dipper and to a lesser extent the Summer
Triangle, but once you see it you can't unsee it.  In China Yingshi was
associated with the boar and the porcupine because those two lunar mansions
overlapped with it.  And perhaps not coincidentally, the grandson of Zhuanxu
was said to be Yu the Great, who founded the Xia dynasty, and whose symbol was
the boar.  Yingshi had some other rather poetic names as well: "Ancestral
Temple," the "Four Supports of Heaven," and my favorite, the "Palace of
Darkness."

Well the Zhuanxu calendar was a standard kind of calendar, it marked the
months, the new year, the equinoxes and so forth.  The first calendar of a
specifically astronomical character comes somewhat later, probably around 350
BC, but possibly a few centuries earlier.  This is the Hsia Hsiao Cheng.  It
resembled more a farmer's almanac than anything else as it included notes on
the weather and animal migration patterns over the course of the year.  But it
also included the positions of the most important constellations throughout the
year to help the reader keep track of what time of the year it was.

It's around this time, too, in the middle of the 4th century BC that we see
records from the earliest astronomers of significance.  Or at least, the
earliest of significance that were not purely legendary like Hsi and Ho from
last episode.  These astronomers are Shih Shen and Gan De and their main claim
to fame was in compiling the earliest star catalog in China.  This star catalog
contained around 800 stars in it, making it comparable in size to the star
catalog of Hipparchus a few centuries later.  Shih Shen and Gan De apparently
worked independently and their individual star catalogs were later merged,
probably around 70 BC.

Shih Shen's other main surviving accomplishment is in making the first recorded
observation of sunspots, which he described as being like an eclipse that began
at the center of the Sun and moved outward.  Gan De apparently produced a
substantial body of literature on astronomy in the form of two books.  The
first of these was called Tian Wen Xinzhan, which translates to "New
astrological prognostications of the patterns of the heavens" and was eight
volumes long.  The other text was called Suixing Jing, or the Canon of the
Planet Jupiter, but unfortunately both texts were lost and all we have from
them are a few quotations in later works.  But from what we do have Gan De
seems to have made the first measurements of the synodic periods of the
planets, that is, the time from opposition to opposition, and his measurements
were passably accurate, being correct within a few days of their true values,
with the exception of Mercury, where he gave 136 days instead of 116.  But Gan
De's most intriguing observation to have survived was his possible observation
of Jupiter's moon Ganymede.  One of the later texts quotes him as saying that

> In the year of chan yan . . . , Jupiter was in Zi, it rose in the morning and
> went under in the evening together with the lunar mansions Nǚ, Xū and Wēi. It
> was very large and bright. Apparently, there was a small reddish star
> appended to its side. This is called 'an alliance'

The interpretation that this small reddish star was Ganymede is plausible.
Under very good conditions, Ganymede can in fact be seen with the naked eye by
someone with very good eyesight, and Gan De's description is more or less
consistent with what someone seeing Ganymede would observe.  Incidentally,
Ganymede is not the only such object that could have been discovered before the
invention of the telescope.  The planet Uranus is also visible to the naked
eye, and may have actually been recorded in Hipparchus's star catalog, though
it was not recognized as a planet.

Well, I next wanted to talk a little bit about ancient Chinese cosmological
theories.  Over the centuries there were three principal theories, each of
which had their various proponents at different times.  The oldest of the three
is called the "Kai Thien" theory.  The idea was that the Earth was like a bowl
turned upside down, and the heavens were a hemisphere sitting on top of it.  So
in this picture, the universe consists of two concentric domes.  This was a
rather unusual theory among ancient civilizations.  It is fairly common to see
theories that take the Earth to be flat and the heavens to be a hemisphere
sitting on top of it, but I don't know of any other case where the Earth was
also taken to be convex.  Ursa Major was taken to be at the center of the
heavens, and China, naturally, was in the middle of the Earth, which was also
the highest point.  Rain flowed down to the edges of the Earth where it formed
an ocean surrounding the Earth.

Now, in the Kai Thien theory the shape of the Earth was actually not exactly
hemispherical.  Its edges were straight, forming a square, so the picture is
more like one of those bowls you might see at a fancy restaurant that is sort
of curved on the bottom, but square on the sides.  This idea that the Earth was
square was also a characteristically Chinese idea.  The distance between the
heavens and the Earth at China, the highest point, was taken to be 80,000 li.
Now, like the Greek "stade," the length of the unit of the "li" is somewhat
uncertain and fluctuated fairly substantially over the centuries.  But very
roughly a li was about a third of a mile, or about half a kilometer.  So in the
Kai Thien theory, the heavens were around 40,000 km above China.  Now, another
unusual feature of the theory was that because the Earth curved down, as did
the heavens, at the lowest point of the Earth, where the great ocean was, the
heavens were quite a bit closer, only 20,000 li, or 10,000 km above the Earth.
This meant that the parts of the heavens near the edges were actually lower
than the highest point on Earth.  In this model, the rising and setting of the
Sun and stars was simply an illusion.  Nothing actually passed under the Earth.
The Sun and stars were simply only visible when they were somewhat close by.
Specifically, the Sun could illuminate a circle of diameter 167,000 li, or
around 80,000 km.  The whole of the heavens rotated like a mill-stone, which is
an analogy that Chinese astronomers frequently invoked.  An astronomer named
Wang Chhung wrote in the Lun Heng:

> The sun and moon are attached to heaven, and follow its movements during the
> four seasons.  Their movement may be compared to that of ants crawling on a
> rolling millstone.  The movements of the sun and moon are slow, while heaven
> moves very fast.

Incidentally, about a century earlier the Roman architect Vitruvius also made a
very similar analogy of the motions of the Sun and the planets to ants crawling
on a potter's wheel.  Well, because the Sun and stars never went below the
Earth in this model, since there was nothing below the Earth, the only reason
they appeared to set was that they simply got too far away to see.  Here, Wang
Chhung made another analogy, that it was like a man walking off into the
distance on a level plain while holding a torch.  As he recedes the torch
becomes fainter and fainter until it's not visible at all.  So it was with the
Sun, when it moved to one edge of the heavens in the evening it eventually
disappeared from sight.  Now, later opponents of this theory seized on the same
analogy to argue why this theory must be wrong.  After all, when we see a
sunset, it doesn't really look like the Sun is moving off into the distance and
gradually getting fainter.  It's not getting smaller and fainter, if anything
it appears to get a bit larger on the horizon.  And it does literally look like
it is going under the horizon.

Well, proponents of the Kai Thien theory never really had good answers to these
objections and by the Han Dynasty serious astronomers had moved on to more
plausible cosmologies.  But as the oldest theory it nevertheless remained
influential in a society that prized tradition.  One of the questions that
early astronomers in this school raised was why the polar axis seemed to be
inclined.  We observe the stars to revolve around the north star, but in China
the north star is at an altitude of about 40°.  If China is the center of the
Earth, wouldn't it be more natural if the heavens revolved around the point
directly above the Earth's center so that the north star was directly overhead?
An astronomer named Yao Hsin in the middle of the 3rd century AD argued that
the tilt of the polar axis was evidence that there was a second Earth.  This
lower Earth was what supported the celestial axis.  In analogy to a human head,
the upper Earth was like the top of the head and the lower Earth, which
supported the heavens, was like the chin.  But as with a head, the chin cannot
be right on the bottom, it has to jut forward a little bit.  So that was why
the polar axis had to be somewhat tilted away from vertical.  The last detail
of the Kai Thien theory that I'll mention is that the polar axis was seen as a
kind of pole that the heavens slid up and down along.  So during the summer the
heavens slid up the pole and were actually somewhat farther away from Earth,
and during the winter the heavens slid down the pole and were somewhat closer.

The next major cosmological theory is called the Hun Thien School, or the
theory of the celestial sphere.  As the name implies, the idea was that a great
sphere surrounded the Earth and the planets and stars were embedded onto this
sphere.  The idea of a celestial sphere is somewhat implicit in the coordinate
systems used by Shih Shen and Gan De in their star catalogs, but the first real
description of the cosmological system comes in the 1st century AD.  In this
theory the diameter of the sphere is taken to be 2,032,300 li, which is around
1 million kilometers.  But calling it the celestial sphere theory is a slight
misnomer since the theory actually held that the heavens weren't perfectly
spherical, they were 1000 li shorter in the north-south direction than in the
east-west direction.  This sphere was said to be held together by some sort of
a "bond." The astronomer Chang Heng described the theory as follows in the Hun
I Chu:

> The heavens are like a hen's egg and as round as a crossbow bullet; the earth
> is like the yolk of the egg, and lies alone in the center.  Heaven is large
> and earth small.  Inside the lower part of the heavens there is water.  The
> heavens are supported by vapour, the earth floats on the waters.  The
> circumference of the heavens is divided into 365 and a quarter degrees; hence
> half of it, 182 5/8°, is above the earth, and the other half is below.  This
> is why, of the 28 lunar mansions only half are visible at one time.  The two
> extremities of the heavens are the north and south poles, the former, in the
> middle of the sky, is exactly 36° above the earth, and consequently a circle
> with a diameter of 72° encloses all the stars which are perpetually visible.
> A similar circle around the south pole encloses the stars which we never
> see.... The rotation goes on like that around the axle of a chariot.

Now, we see from this description that this theory wasn't quite like
Aristotle's conception of the universe with the Earth as a sphere surrounded by
the spheres of the heavens.  Here the Earth and the heavens are indeed
spherical, or nearly so, but the Earth is nevertheless floating on water, so
the lower half of the sphere of the heavens is filled with water.  Now, in
contrast to the earlier Kai Thien theory, the Hun Thien theory held that the
Sun really did go beneath the Earth during the night.  But proponents of the
older Kai Thien theory argued that the theory of the celestial sphere was
implausible on its own terms because it implied that the fiery sun was doused
in water as it travelled underneath the Earth every night.  In reply, the
astronomer Ko Hung argued that the Sun was analogous to dragons, which are
fiery by nature, but can live in the water.  Well, despite some of these
quirks, by the end of the Han dynasty, the Hun Thien school had become the
dominant cosmological theory.

The final cosmological theory that had some influence was called the Hsuan Yeh
theory, and seems to have been associated with Taoism.  The Hsuan Yeh theory
was not nearly as influential as the Hun Thien school, but the Hun Thien school
may have been influenced it.  Rather than describing it myself, we can turn to
a later description of the theory by Ge Hong, who was writing in the early 4th
century AD:

> The books of Hsuan Yeh school were all lost, but Chhi Meng, one of the
> librarians, remembered what its masters before his time had taught concerning
> it.  They said that the heavens were empty and void of substance.  When we
> look up at it we can see that it is immensely high and far away, having no
> bounds.  The human eye is color-blind and the pupil short-sighted; this is
> why the heavens appear deeply blue.  It is like seeing yellow mountains
> sideways at a great distance, for then they all appear blue.  Or when we gaze
> down into a valley a thousand fathoms deep, it seems somber and black.  But
> the blue of the mountains is not a true color, nor is the dark color of the
> valley really its own.  The sun, the moon, and the company of the stars float
> freely in the empty space, moving or standing still.  All are condensed
> vapor.  Thus the seven luminaries sometimes appear and sometimes disappear,
> sometimes move forward and sometimes retrograde, seeming to follow each a
> different series of regularities; their advances and recessions are not the
> same.  It is because they are not rooted to any basis or tied together that
> their movements can vary so much.  Among the heavenly bodies the pole star
> always keeps its place, and the Great Bear never sinks below the horizon in
> the west as do other stars.  The seven luminaries all fall back eastwards,
> the sun making 1° a day and the moon 13°.  Their speed depends on their
> individual natures, which shows that they are not attached to anything, for
> if they were fastened to the body of heaven, this could not be so.

This picture of the universe as a vast void in which the heavenly bodies are
floating about is really quite advanced for its time.  Another proponent of the
theory, Yu Hsi, described it around the same time like this:

> I think that the heavens are infinitely high, and that the space below the
> earth is unfathomably deep.  Undoubtedly the form of the heavens above is in
> a permanent state of rest, and the body of the earth below also remains quiet
> and motionless.  One envelops the other; if the one is square so is the
> other, if the one is round, so must the other be; they cannot differ as to
> squareness and roundness.  The luminaries are distributed, each pursuing its
> own course like the high and low tides of the sea and its rivers, and like
> the thousands of living creatures which sometimes come out and sometimes hide
> away.

Particularly in later descriptions of the theory, the motions of the Sun and
the planets are said to be due to the forces of a "hard wind" that blows the
celestial objects about.  By the time we get to the 11th century, Chinese
astronomers were taking this theory seriously enough that there was some
discussion around the specific physics of this "hard wind."

Now although the overall picture of the universe is quite congruent with that
of modern astronomy, the main shortcoming of the Hsuan Yeh theory at the time
was its inability to really make any quantitative predictions, and certainly
any quantitative predictions that would distinguish it from the model of the
celestial sphere.  But this was actually a broader issue with Chinese astronomy
in general.  One of the great scholars of Chinese science, Joseph Needham,
argued that Greek and Chinese astronomy had opposite shortcomings.  In the case
of Chinese astronomy, the fundamental shortcoming was that its geometry was
underdeveloped, so that it was difficult for Chinese astronomers to connect
their extensive observations to any underlying theory that was more
sophisticated than extrapolating from historical patterns.  By contrast, the
main impediment to the development of Greek astronomy was a kind of obsession
with geometry to the detriment of its connection to observation.  Greek
astronomers were willing to entertain highly elaborate models of celestial
motion, but were less interested in the physical character of these models.  So
long as they produced the correct motions of the planets, the Greeks were
satisfied.

Well, despite the relative prestige of astronomy in Chinese society, the
attitude of Confucians to questions about the nature of the heavens tended to
be one of indifference.  There is a tale written in the Lieh Tzu sometime
between the 4th and 1st centuries BC that illustrates this kind of
apathy.  It goes like this:

> When Confucius was travelling in the east, he came upon two boys who were
> arguing, and he asked them what they were arguing about. One said, 'I believe
> that the sun is nearer to us when it is rising and that it is farther from us
> at noon.'  The other said 'I, on the contrary, believe that the sun is
> farther from us when it is rising and setting and that it is nearest to us at
> noon.'  The first boy replied 'When the sun is rising it looks to be as large
> as a chariot-roof, but at noon the Sun appears to be no bigger than a plate.
> That which is large must be near us, while that which is small must be
> further away.'  But the second boy said, 'At dawn the sun is cool but at noon
> it burns, and the hotter it gets the nearer it must be to us.'  Confucius was
> unable to solve their problem.  So the two boys laughed at him and mocked
> him, saying, 'Why do people pretend that you are so learned?'

This story is in genre associated, maybe unsurprisingly, with Taoism in which
one or two small boys or an old man defeats Confucius in argument.  But the
broader point in the story is that the Confucian tradition was very interested
in the role that astronomy played in society, in maintaining social order by
setting the calendar and so forth, but the Taoist criticism was that the
Confucians weren't so interested in astronomy as such.  Just as they didn't
spend much effort pondering the supernatural, they didn't spend much effort
pondering abstract questions about the natural world.  If we look at another
predecessor of the modern sciences, alchemy, it's perhaps not a surprise that
it was mostly associated with Taoism and was not practiced in polite society.
Alchemy lacked the cultural cachet that astronomy had, so it was essentially
ignored by the orthodox schools of thought in Chinese intellectual culture.
And it probably didn't help that it was a messy, grubby business where you'd
have to get your hands dirty.

But this is not a history of alchemy, this is a history of astronomy, so I
think I will leave things here for this month.  Next month we will look at
Chinese theories of eclipses and planetary motion, along with the role of the
lunar mansions, the hsiu.  Then we may skip ahead a little bit and talk about
one of the more interesting encounters between eastern and western science when
Jesuit missionaries arrived in China in the 16th century.  I hope you'll join
me then.  Until the next full moon, good night and clear skies.

## Additional references

* Needham, Science and Civilisation in China, Vol. 3
