---
categories: episode
date: '2024-01-01'
description: We start to explore the relationship between the heavens and the Earth
  in Ancient China, along with the role of astronomers. One of the most important
  concepts in Chinese political thought to emerge from this was the Mandate of Heaven.
  Finally, we look at the oldest record of Chinese astronomy, the story of the astronomers
  Xi and Ho.
keywords:
- astronomy
- history
- china
layout: episode
number: 37
title: The Mandate of Heaven
---

## Transcript

Good evening, and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon.  My
name is Joe Antognini.

Well last month we wrapped up our tour of the astronomy of ancient India and
this month, as promised, we will cross the Himalayas and begin our journey of
the astronomy of ancient China.  And, as with the other civilizations we have
looked at, I think it is best to start by looking at the structure of the land
before the people arrived.  I've generally been following this pattern with the
other civilizations we've looked at, but I think China is somewhat unusual in
this regard.  In the case of many of the other ancient civilizations the
geography really screams out the borders of the civilization and how it will
influence the people who reside there.  In Egypt, for instance, we have a
narrow strip of fertile land along the Nile surrounded by desert.  Naturally,
Egyptian civilization dominated this strip of land.  From time to time it
extended out to the northeast into the Levant, but really its core was this one
river valley.  In the case of India, the subcontinent was hemmed in by the
Himalayas and was really only somewhat accessible through the northwest.  In
both cases you could look at the geography and reasonably guess which cities
would fall within the modern day boundaries of Egypt or India, and which would
be outside.

In the case of China it's a little harder to infer from the geography of the
region that the modern day borders would form a unified political entity.  And,
to be sure, particularly as you go to the west of the country, there are a
substantial number of ethnic minorities.  Over 90% of China is ethnically Han,
but the Chinese government recognizes 55 minority ethnicities, among them the
Tibetans, Uyghurs, Mongols, Manchu, and Kazakhs.

Geographically, China has always been a little bit of a fuzzy concept, without
really clear natural boundaries in the way that, say, India had.  There are, of
course, the Himalayas which provide a hard border to the southwest, but other
than that the sphere of influence of Chinese civilization sort of petered out
the further you got away from the heart of the country without there being any
other real natural boundaries.  The terrain is in general relatively hilly,
particularly in the west of the country.  In the southeast of the country the
climate is more tropical and the terrain is dominated by dense jungle.  All
this meant that China was never really inaccessible from the south, but it was
a difficult trek to make, and so contact tended to be limited.  In particular,
the difficulty of travel to the south and west meant that small convoys could
make the occasional journey, which made trade and the exchange of ideas
possible.  But it was much harder for large migrations or invading armies to
come from that direction.

The north, however, was a different story.  Again, the terrain is generally
hilly, but there is a point of contact with the great steppes to the north.
The Asian steppe, or really the Eurasian steppe, is a truly vast region of flat
grassland that extends all the way from Hungary in the west, through Ukraine
above the Black sea, north above the Caspian sea, then east across southern
Siberia and Kazakhstan, and extending through Mongolia.  This region has been
populated since the paleolithic and is probably where the Indo-European
language family originated out of, including, as we learned a few episodes
back, the Aryans who ultimately settled in India.  And, thanks to the vast,
flat, grassy expanse, the region was well suited to a nomadic, pastoralist
lifestyle.  For China, the main consequence of its connection to the eastern
steppe in its north was that over the centuries it suffered from episodic waves
of invasions of nomadic warriors from this direction.  The most significant of
these were, of course, the invasions of Genghis Khan and Kublai Khan who
managed to take control of the country and set up the Yuan dynasty at the end
of the 13th century, but these kinds of invasions were a constant feature of
Chinese history.  Now, as with India, these invasions did not have a huge
impact on Chinese culture more broadly since the invaders were nomadic
pastoralists and were very few in number relative to the agricultural society
they invaded.  So when these invasions did occur, they tended to wipe out the
top of the ruling class and establish themselves in power in their place.  And
over time, through intermarriage with local nobility and the gradual process of
acculturation, they became assimilated into Chinese culture.  But for those at
the top it was a big threat and was what motivated the construction of the
famous Great Wall since China has no natural border to its north.

So, to the southwest there are the Himalayas, to the southeast is dense jungle,
to the east, of course, is the Pacific ocean, the west was hilly and protected
by several deserts, most notably the Gobi desert.  And the north was
unprotected from the Asian steppe.  Within China itself, the main feature that
spurred the development of agricultural civilization is three river systems,
all of which ran largely west to east.  The most important, particularly in
early Chinese history, was along the Yellow River, which is the northernmost of
the three.  The mouth of the Yellow River runs through the Dongying, which is a
relatively modest city by Chinese standards, with only 2 million people in it.
But the much more import city of Beijing is within this river system, about 200
miles NNW of Dongying.  To the south is the Yangtze river whose mouth runs
through the city of Shanghai.  And lastly the southernmost river system in the
Xi river whose mouth is at Shenzhen and Hong Kong.  Broadly speaking, political
power coalesced first in the north and then diffused to the south throughout
Chinese history.

Now, I plan on saving a more methodical walk through the history of Chinese
astronomy until the next episode.  In this first episode I wanted to focus more
on the earliest astronomy which is intermingled with myth and talk about some
of the general characteristics of this ancient Chinese astronomy.  But before
we can get to this it would be helpful to have at least a coarse framework to
talk about Chinese history, because it is truly vast.  As with other
civilizations that span millennia, historians need a way of breaking these
large stretches of time into smaller, more manageable periods.  So, very
broadly, Chinese history is divided into four eras: the prehistoric era, which
stretches from the first arrival of humans during the paleolithic until around
2000 BC.  This is then followed by Ancient China, which develops around 2000 BC
as agriculture has become the dominant mode of food production and large scale
political organization emerges in the form of kingdoms.  221 BC then marks the
transition from Ancient China to Imperial China when the Qin state conquered
the five other rival states in China and unified China under a single political
entity.  This state of affairs lasted until 1912 AD when the Qing dynasty was
overthrown and a republic was established in its place.  This, then marks the
transition to the final era in Chinese history, the modern era.

So, there are these four broad eras, the prehistoric, ancient, Imperial, and
Modern eras.  Our focus, at least for the time being, will be on Ancient and
Imperial China.  But this is still a lot of time.  Each of these eras spans
around two millennia.  So the next level of subdivision is to look at dynastic
lines, which tended to last for a few centuries or so.  Broadly speaking,
Chinese history is characterized by a kind of cycle where a series of strong
emperors consolidate and centralize power over a wide area, but as the
centuries go by the imperial bureaucracy became more and more sclerotic, nobles
in the hinterlands begin to assert their interests more forcefully, and the
empire fragments and eventually a new claimant to the imperial throne replaces
the old dynasty.  A wonderfully poetic description of this cycle comes from the
famous opening line of the Romance of the Three Kingdoms, written in the 14th
century AD: "the empire, long divided, must unite; long united, must divide.
Thus it has ever been."  The Ancient period traditionally has three dynasties,
though the first of these, the Xia dynasty, may have been legendary since the
first references to it appear much later in Chinese history.  The first dynasty
that has a definite historical record is the Shang dynasty which emerges around
1600 BC.  The Shang dynasty lasted about five and a half centuries until it was
supplanted by the Zhou dynasty in 1045 BC which lasts about seven and a half
centuries.

Now, today, it's easy to just scan over a list of the names and dates of the
various dynasties of ancient and Imperial China and just think, ho-hum, empires
rise, empires fall, sic transit gloria mundi and so on.  But in particular this
first dynastic transition, at least the first one that we have records for, had
an enormous impact on the way that the ancient Chinese conceptualized the state
and its relationship to the broader cosmos.  Never before in Chinese history
had a hereditary ruler been deposed and replaced with an entirely new dynastic
line.  How could such a thing be justified?  Now, right from the outset the
general answer to this question had a definite correct answer, at least for any
scholar who valued his head remaining attached to his body.  Since the new guys
were now in charge, you had to come up with some justification for why it was
okay for them to have done what they did.  But you had to be careful about your
reasoning for this justification.  After all, if it was legitimate for you as a
plucky upstart to overthrow the old guard, what was to stop the next plucky
upstart from overthrowing you?  It couldn't be too easy.  It's in this
transition from the Shang to the Zhou dynasty that the concept of the Mandate
of Heaven enters Chinese political thought.  The idea was that the emperor's
right to rule was not granted solely by virtue of his birth.  Ultimately his
right to rule was granted by Heaven, and he ruled so as to keep the Earth in
harmony with Heaven.  So long as he ruled justly and maintained this harmony he
remained the legitimate ruler.  But if he ruled poorly and there was strife and
injustice in the land, Heaven might revoke its mandate and invest it in a new
claimant to the throne.  How would you know that this new claimant indeed had
the Mandate of Heaven?  Well, if he was successful of course.  If he managed to
overthrow the old emperor and install himself on the throne, evidently he must
have had the Mandate of Heaven.  If his rebellion failed, then clearly he did
not.  Now this is an awfully convenient way for a new emperor to post facto
claim that his rebellion was indeed justified, but when one dynasty replaced
another the mythology would often go somewhat further to make Heaven's approval
of the new claimant more explicit.  In the case of this first transition from
the Shang to the Zhou dynasty, in the twilight of the Shang dynasty one of the
vassal states was the kingdom of Zhou, which, at the time, was ruled by a man
named King Wen.  King Wen had noticed the decline in quality of the Shang
emperors and spied an opportunity to break free from the yoke of the Shang
emperor and possibly conquer the empire for himself.  As he was plotting this
rebellion he noticed two signs in the heavens in 1059 BC.  The first was a rare
conjunction of the five planets in the constellation of Cancer.  A few months
later, a comet appeared in the sky, now known to be Halley's Comet.  King Wen
interpreted these signs as an indication that he had secured the favor of
Heaven in his scheme to overthrow the emperor and install himself in its place.
Now, although King Wen's rebellions were generally successful, he himself died
in battle before he was able to achieve complete victory, so it was his son,
King Wu, who became the first emperor of the new Zhou dynasty.  But this
concept of the Mandate of Heaven that emerged in this dynastic transition was
to play a central role in Chinese history as a check against the power of the
emperor.  And as we can see from the founding mythology of the Zhou dynasty,
this idea had a very literal link to the heavens themselves, being revealed as
an astronomical sign in the sky.

Well, before I can talk more about the way that the ancient Chinese thought
about astronomy during the Shang and Zhou dynasties, I have to say a little
more about what ancient Chinese society looked like.  Of course, in the very
earliest periods when humans first arrived in the area, societies were likely
fairly egalitarian as most hunter-gatherer societies are.  But as people
settled in the river valleys and turned toward a sedentary agricultural
lifestyle their society became much more unequal.  Relatively early on,
certainly by the time of the transition from Paleolithic to Ancient China
around 2000 BC, power had consolidated into a relatively small landowning
nobility who controlled a vast mass of peasants who worked the land.  This is
usually characterized as a feudal society, though officially, Chinese communist
histories go even further and assert that life in this period was really a
"slavery society" and that true feudalism only started during the Imperial era
since peasants during this time could be bought and sold.  Either way, as in
other feudal or slavery societies a different set of laws applied to the
nobility and the peasants.  Peasants, for instance, would be subject to
corporeal punishment for various crimes whereas the nobility were not, unless
the crime were sufficiently serious like some form of treason or rebellion.

So, life in Ancient China was highly stratified.  And like other such
societies, say, Ancient Egypt as another example, it's important to remember
that what we know about their astronomy, and most of what we know about their
culture more broadly, was really only the astronomy and culture of a very small
elite.  Basically nothing survives about the ways that the vast mass of
peasants conceived of the heavens.  Even practices like ancestor worship, which
later on were broadly performed by the people as a whole, seem to have
initially been confined only to the nobility in the earliest times.  As with
other societies that engaged in ancestor worship, again Ancient Egypt is a good
parallel, it was probably believed early on that relatively few people had an
afterlife at all.  Only the great rulers survived into the afterlife and could
be worshiped after they had passed on.

Well, sitting on top of the landowning nobility in ancient Chinese society was
the emperor. Now, during these early dynasties, much like the kings of early
medieval Europe, the emperor was a far cry in splendor and power from the later
emperors of Imperial China.  Their courts were relatively small and their power
limited.  Their domain was still fairly provincial --- there were still
independent states throughout China, particularly in the south, and even within
their domain of nominal rule the vassal states on the outskirts were really
only loosely controlled by the emperor.  Among the nobility these early
emperors were considered to be more of a first among equals than an absolute
ruler before whom all had to submit.

So if these early emperors were not exerting their will upon the country with
an iron fist, what were they doing?  It is here that we can see some of the
roles that astronomy played within the Chinese state.  In these early days, one
of the critical roles that the emperor played was almost as a chief priest of
sorts.  The emperor was responsible for performing various rituals to ensure
that the land remained in harmony with the heavens.  This idea of a kind of
cosmic harmony between heaven and Earth is really central to early Chinese
astronomy and we'll see it crop up again and again.  Some of the most important
rituals had to do with the change of the seasons.  The emperor would employ a
chief astronomer who would provide reports to the emperor on the state of the
heavens.  As time progressed and the responsibility of the astronomers grew the
astronomer royal was given the authority to employ a team of a few dozen
astronomers to help him make observations and predictions.  One of the most
important predictions that the astronomer royal would provide the emperor was
the date that each new season would start.  Spring, in particular, was
especially important because it signalled the time to start planting.  So the
astronomer royal was charged with finding the first day of spring, but beyond
that, he also had to find the day that was most astrologically propitious for
beginning the planting season since this could be some time later.  Then, on
this chosen day, the emperor would travel to the east, since the east was
associated with spring, and he would ritually plow three furrows into the
ground.  Then his most important court officials would follow him in this and
plow three furrows of their own.

This ritual is a nice exemplar of how the ancient Chinese saw their
relationship to heaven.  When things were right in the world, there was a
harmony between heaven and Earth and the link between the two was in the person
of the emperor.  The emperor, via his astronomers, tracked the heavens and then
behaved in accord with its changes in order to keep all things in a cosmic
unison.  When the emperor failed to do act in harmony with the heavens there
would be chaos on Earth: bloodshed, floods, plague.  And this chaos would not
be limited to the Earth --- it would extend to the heavens as well and there
would be unusual, ominous events in the sky --- eclipses, new stars, even the
planets themselves could go off their ordinary paths.  One of the earliest
Chinese astronomers, Shi Shen, put it this way:

> When a wise prince occupies the throne, the moon follows the right way.  When
> the prince is not wise and the ministers exercise power, the moon loses its
> way.  When the high officials let their interests prevail over public
> interest, the moon goes astray towards north or south.  When the moon is
> rash, it is because the prince is slow in punishing; when the moon is slow,
> it is because the prince is rash in punishing.

So we see that there was a kind of golden middle way that had to be walked.  If
things on Earth veered too far in one direction, the Heavens would have to move
in the opposite direction to maintain balance.

Now, to be clear, particularly in the early days, the emperor was not viewed as
the singular link between heaven and Earth.  But he was viewed in a very real
sense as the center of the Earth, and paralleled the heavens.  Perhaps due to
China's isolation from other civilizations of similar scale and sophistication,
China has historically viewed itself as sitting at the center of the world.
This kind of a self-conception is by no means unique among historical
societies, but was probably more pronounced than usual in China.  If the
emperor looked north, west, east, or south there were no other cultures they
considered their equal.  There was simply ocean to the east, mountains and
jungle to the south, desert to the west, and barbarians to the north.  In fact
China's name for itself in Mandarin, Zhongguo, literally translates to
something like the "Middle Kingdom," or "Central State."  The picture of the
world was one in which the emperor sat in the middle and civilization emanated
out from him, growing weaker with distance.  So around the emperor was his
court, who performed his will in the palace.  Then there were his officials who
carried out his decrees throughout the land.  Then there were his subjects who
were under his direct rule and enjoyed the fruits of the civilization that he
provided.  Further still were tributary kingdoms which governed themselves
quasi-independently, but sent the emperor tribute.  And furthest from the
emperor were the barbarians who did not enjoy his benevolent rule.  The idea
that the emperor was at the center of civilization was taken so seriously that
formally Chinese diplomacy did not permit the concept of independent states.
There were simply kingdoms which ruled on behalf of the emperor and paid him
tribute in return, or there were barbarians.  As such there was no place for
foreign diplomats in this system, individuals who formally represented one
state to another.  There were simply tributary envoys.  These envoys would
ritually kowtow to the emperor, make the deepest bow in Chinese etiquette in
which one would kneel on the ground and bend down until one's head touched the
ground to symbolically recognize the superiority of the emperor.  The envoy
would then present their tribute to the emperor and in return would receive
gifts from the emperor.  Finally, the emperor would formally grant the ruler of
the tributary kingdom the authority to rule the land in the emperor's name.
But the emperor would not deign to receive the representative of an independent
state as an equal.  Even during the 17th and 18th centuries AD when there was
more extensive contact between China and European powers, the Chinese state
maintained this fiction that the European powers were simply tributary states
of the Middle Kingdom which had voluntarily submitted to the authority of the
emperor.  This all encompassing view of the powers of the emperor is even seen
in the word used to describe the lands he governed: tianxia, which literally
translates to "all under heaven."  Originally this word referred to the entire
Earth, but as the view developed that the entirety of the Earth was under the
authority of the emperor, the word came to mean the lands under his direct
rule.

Now, this view had a cosmic parallel.  The emanation out from the emperor to
the four corners of earth with all things revolving around him, north, south,
east, and west, was then mirrored in the heavens with the stars all rotating
about the north star.  The polar region, and the north star in particular, were
then closely associated with the emperor.  The polar region was called the
"Purple palace," or the "Purple forbidden enclosure."  The stars around the
north celestial pole were identified with the emperor himself and his immediate
family: so along with the star to represent the emperor there was a star to
represent the empress and the crown prince.  Outside this immediate grouping
there were the four advisors to the emperor.  Further still there was the royal
secretary, the chief judge, the handmaidens of the empress.  The palace itself
was represented physically with some stars being the various walls of the
palace, and another representing the canopy that shaded the emperor.
Interestingly, Chinese history is so long that the precession of the equinoxes
has a very noticeable effect.  Over the millennia the north celestial pole has
migrated from near Thuban, in the constellation Draco around 3000 BC to Kochab
in Ursa Minor around 1000 BC, and only recently has come near Polaris.  If we
look at the path the north celestial pole has taken we find a string of stars
that are associated with the emperor or some kind of identification with the
pole.  So there is a star called the "celestial pivot," another the "celestial
pillar," and another still the "celestial emperor."  So probably some of these
names were given in a time when the star was close to the north celestial pole.

And as an aside here, it's worth noting the maybe obvious fact that this
special attention paid to the north celestial pole is a characteristic feature
of societies at northern latitudes.  These cultures all feature the Big Dipper
and the pole star prominently in their celestial mythology.  Although
equatorial societies can generally see the Big Dipper, it is just not as
impressive low on the horizon compared to at higher latitudes when it is always
to be seen circling the pole.  So it, along with the pole star tend not to
feature so prominently in the mythology of equatorial cultures.  Instead
equatorial cultures tend to focus more on the zodiac and the Milky Way.

Well, the earliest evidence we have of an interest in the heavens in ancient
China comes from archaeological evidence from the prehistoric era.  There are a
number of images on pottery from probably the middle of the third millennium BC
that depict the sun and the moon, and at least one image seems to represent a
constellation.

There's unfortunately not too much we can infer from these oldest depictions
besides the fact that from an early age the Chinese were evidently interested
in astronomy, but the oldest written record of astronomy tells us quite a bit
more.  This comes to us in a text called the Canon of Yao which was included in
a work called the Book of Documents which was supposedly edited by Confucius
himself.  Now, I'll have more to say about Confucius later, but his inclusion
of this work in the Book of Documents guaranteed its survival for later
generations.  Traditionally, Confucius was believed to have collected in a
number of ancient texts into the "Sishu Wujing," which translates to the Four
Books and Five Classics.  This collection acted as a kind of canon of
foundational texts to Chinese culture in much the same way that the collection
of texts in the Old Testament and New Testament came to be a set of
foundational texts for Western culture.  Like the books of the Bible, the
documents contained in the Four Books and Five Classics are quite varied.
There is the Classic of Poetry, which as the name implies, is a collection of
poems.  The Spring and Autumn Annals is a historical text.  The Analects is a
collection of sayings of Confucius along with discussions of these sayings.
The I Ching is a book on divination.  There's the Book of Rites, which is an
instruction manual of sorts on courtly etiquette and ritual.  And the Book of
Documents contains speeches, proclamations, and other documents from ancient
Chinese kings.  Now, before getting into the Canon of Yao itself, it's worth
saying a little bit more about the historiography here, and just how these
oldest documents have survived to us.  Now, writing itself is very old in China
and appears to have developed independently from any other civilization.  The
oldest written artifacts date to the late 13th century BC during the Shang
dynasty.  These are on what are called oracle bones.  The idea was that you
would take the bone from an animal, usually a shoulder blade which had a large,
flat surface.  Various characters would be etched into the bone and then you
would apply a hot bronze pin to the bone.  The hot pin would cause a network of
cracks to form across the bone, and the structure of these cracks with respect
to the characters could be interpreted to divine the future.  Even at this
early date, many of the characters that appear on these oracle bones are
recognizable to their modern Chinese equivalents.

Now, despite the fact that writing began quite early on, as with other ancient
civilizations, the oldest documents that survive to us generally do not do so
in their original form, but were compiled, quoted, and almost certainly edited
by later authors, who may have been themselves collected and edited by still
later authors in turn.  So we have to keep in mind that the oldest documents
probably also bear the imprint of the opinions of later stages of the
civilization.  Even if they did not explicitly change anything in the text,
their decision to preserve the text at all was a reflection of the values of
these later cultures and its opinion of the earlier culture.  So as with the
science of ancient Greece, in ancient China we are to some degree looking
through a glass, darkly.  One particularly important event was the burning of
books and burning of scholars in 213 BC.  Now to provide a bit of background
here, towards the end of the Ancient Period of China, the Zhou dynasty became
extremely weak.  The emperor was in essence reduced to a figurehead who
performed the rituals that were required of him, but had no real temporal
power.  Now, nominally, the rulers of the various kingdoms throughout China had
declared their allegiance to the emperor and went through the motions of acting
as tributary kingdoms to the emperor.  But towards the end, these rulers didn't
even bother to keep up appearances and ultimately declared themselves to be
independent states, even if they had been de facto independent for quite some
time.  The last century and a half of the Zhou dynasty is called the Warring
States period and as the name implies it was a bit of a chaotic time in
internal Chinese geopolitics.  But, as with Renaissance Italy or Classical
Greece, a time of turbulent politics can coincide with a vibrant intellectual
flowering, and this is just what happened in Ancient China.  Without a strong
central authority to enforce rigid intellectual conformity, the late Zhou
dynasty saw a period in Chinese cultural history that has been called the
Hundred Schools of Thought.  During these years philosophers would travel from
kingdom to kingdom and provide their services to local rulers and officials for
a few years before moving on to the next.  During their stay they would counsel
the ruler on matters of state: war, diplomacy, law, and so forth.  These
scholars would hail from some philosophical school or other, but they were only
loosely bound to it, so during this period there was a flourishing of
approaches to the great philosophical questions of the day.  And, broadly
speaking, the most important questions that they were interested in had to do
with the nature and mechanism of government.  Now, as the name Hundred Schools
of Thought implies, during this period there wasn't a single answer to these
questions, but over time the various approaches coalesced into a handful of
major schools.

By far the most important of these schools was Confucianism.  Confucius himself
somewhat predated the Warring States Period, dying probably in 479 BC, a few
years after the usual date that's cited as the start of the Warring States
Period of 475 BC.  But his legacy was extremely long and during the subsequent
centuries his intellectual disciples expanded on his philosophy.  Now a
description of the tenants of Confucianism could easily merit an entire podcast
series of its own, but some of the hallmarks of Confucian thought was an
emphasis on harmony, particularly social harmony and a harmony with nature.
Every person must situate him- or herself appropriately in the natural order of
things.  This meant that a high value was placed on social order and
hierarchies.  The place of the individual with respect to broader society was
important, of course, but most important was one's relationship to one's own
family.  Situating oneself within the proper order of things meant faithfully
carrying out the duties incumbent upon one's station in life.  Parents must
provide for and guide their children.  Children have a duty to show respect to
their parents.  The official has a duty to carry out the will of the emperor,
and the emperor has a duty to rule wisely to the benefit of his people.
Another hallmark of Confucianism is an emphasis on ritual and tradition.

Another major school to emerge from the Hundred Schools of Thought has been
called Legalism.  The philosopher Li Kui is generally credited as being the
founder of this school, but the most influential Legalist philosopher was Han
Fei, who worked at the end of the Warring States Period.  Now you'll recall
that earlier I was saying that in early Chinese history, the role that the
emperor was supposed to play was somewhat fuzzy.  The emperor had a variety of
rituals that he performed, but in periods when the emperor was stronger he
would exert his will on his tributary kingdoms more, and in periods when he was
weaker he became almost a kind of figurehead.  So being an emperor in this
early period of Chinese history could mean a lot of different things.  But what
was the role of the *ideal* emperor?  Han Fei and other Legalist scholars came
out very forcefully with the idea that first and foremost the role of the
emperor is to make law, and, importantly, to effectively enforce this law
throughout the land.  Now, to us moderners, this may seem like a rather obvious
thing.  Of course the principal role of the state is to make and enforce laws
--- what else could it be?  But this perspective is an artifact of the
institutions we have grown up around that themselves were shaped by centuries
of political thought.  In the ancient world it was much less clear.
Governments looked very different from a modern state, and what their role and
purpose was was still being worked out.  To Han Fei, the ideal emperor would
propound law, and by this he meant that there would be a single system of law
throughout the land with no exceptions.  The same laws should apply to the
commoners as to the court officials.  What applied in one village would apply
to the village next door and to a village on the other side of the empire.
Moreover, because the law came from the emperor, nobles could not make up their
own laws.  Thus under a single legal system there would be harmony throughout
the land.  But one of his important innovations is that Han Fei recognized that
simply propounding the law was not sufficient.  The ideal emperor had to be
sufficiently competent to ensure that it was properly enforced.  This he called
"Shu".  To achieve this Han Fei emphasized the importance of xing-ming, which
we might roughly translate to accountability.  An official's deeds should match
his words.  If he says he is to do something, he should do just that.  If he
says he will do something and does not do it, he merits punishment.  If he says
he will do something and does even more, he merits punishment for overstepping
his bounds.  If he says he will do something and does precisely that, he should
be rewarded.  An example Han Fei gives is of the emperor falling asleep and the
keeper of the hat laying a robe on the sleeping emperor.  In Han Fei's judgment
the keeper of the hat should be executed for this act because he has
overstepped the bounds of his office.  Moreover, the keeper of the robe, whose
responsibility it was to lay the robe on the emperor should also be put to
death because he was negligent in his duties.  In Legalist thought this system
of rewards and punishments is termed the "two handles," and are the principle
means by which the law is enforced.  Because the authority to reward and punish
is so powerful, the emperor must jealously guard this power for himself so that
he can maintain his rule.  If you are thinking that all this sounds somewhat
Machiavellian, you would not be the first to see this parallel between Western
and Eastern political philosophy.  Of the various philosophical schools that
came out of the Hundred Schools of Thought, Legalism advocated the most
strenuously for a powerful and highly centralized state.

Now, there are two other schools of thought that are briefly worth mentioning:
Taoism and Mohism.  Taoism was somewhat orthogonal to the other main schools of
thought.  Like Confucianism, there was a very strong emphasis on living in
harmony with the natural order of things, but Taoist philosophers were on the
whole far less interested in questions of hierarchy and state.  One depiction
of the ideal society was one in which the villagers in a village knew that
there was another village off yonder because they could hear the cocks crowing
in the morning, but otherwise had no interaction with them.  Because Taoism was
more inward looking it had less of an impact on Chinese politics than
Confucianism and Legalism.  The last major school to emerge that I'll mention
was Mohism.  The Mohists can maybe be roughly analogized to the Pythagoreans in
ancient Greece, in that they organized themselves into a coherent school with a
fairly radical philosophy.  Central to Mohism was the idea of "jian ai" which
translates to something like "impartial care."  Individuals should act with
love for all other people even if they are not of the same family or even
nationality.  Mohism stood rather starkly in opposition to Confucianism which
proposed a kind of hierarchy of cares, where one cared most about one's
immediate family, then one's clan, then one's village and so on.  The Mohists
also stood in opposition to what they saw as the extravagance of Confucianism
with its fussy rituals and decadent luxury.  The Confucians wasted time
listening to music and enjoying art when there were practical matters of state
to attend to.  To the Mohists, the wise man should live an austere life, eating
only what he needed to and should use his time working for the good of the
people.  Rather like the Pythagoreans they, too, were also interested in
mathematics.

Now, in this cursory overview of some of the ideas that were sprouting up
during the late period of the Zhou dynasty, one thing that stands out is that
the questions that the philosophers of the day were considering were intensely
practical.  They were interested in questions of virtue, morality, duty, and
politics.  There is not much discussion that emerges on more abstruse topics
like, say, metaphysics, or epistemology, or cosmology.  There's not really an
equivalent of the Ionian School in Greece, where generations of philosophers
argued with themselves over whether the fundamental nature of matter was fire
or air or water, or some combination of them or something else entirely.  We
don't really see Chinese philosophers of this period deal with what we might
call the supernatural.  Now, this is not to say that there was no belief
whatsoever in the supernatural.  The common people had worshiped various nature
gods since ancient times, and there was even a highest deity called Shangdi to
whom the emperor himself made sacrifices.  But relative to other cultures
across the globe, the Greeks, Egyptians, Indians, Hebrews, Babylonians, there
is surprisingly little discussion of these kinds of subjects by the Chinese
sages.  Probably the only culture with a similar kind of focus on a more
practical kind of philosophy is the Romans, but even here the Roman
philosophical tradition was quite meagre compared to the Chinese.  As one
specialist of Chinese philosophy, Herbert Finagrette, put it, Chinese
philosophy described "the secular as sacred."

Okay, so this has been a somewhat long prologue to the main event, the burning
of books and burning of scholars that I started with.  Now, after the centuries
of political fragmentation during the Period of the Warring States, a series of
kings from the Qin state managed to conquer the six other major states and
unify all of China once again, or at least the regions around the eastern
Yellow and Yangtze river valleys.  When the dust had settled from these
conquests, the king of the Qin state, Yang Zheng, had become emperor and
adopted the regal name Qin Shi Huang.  Now, Yang Zheng's rise to the top was
not all peaches and cream.  He survived two assassination attempts and himself
had to knock off several rivals to the throne.  So when he finally achieved the
highest office in Chinese society, he was not the sort of man to kick his feet
back and become complacent.  Now, the emperor had a counselor named Li Si.  Li
Si was not a native of the Qin state, which was not especially unusual as a
scholar and advisor in this period, but nevertheless the end of the Warring
States Period was a turbulent time for such a role, and Li Si was shrewd enough
to survive it.  In 237 BC a faction in the court encouraged King Yang Zheng to
expel his foreign advisors on the logic that as foreigners they could not be
trusted and were possibly spies for his enemies.  Li Si reportedly made an
eloquent defence of the role of foreigners in the court, and just to be safe he
made sure that his argument was not only intellectual and noted the benefits of
having "the sultry girls of Zhao" in the emperor's presence.  Well, Li Si's
advice had been critical in Yang Zheng's conquests of his rival states.  Li Si
understood that Qin Shi Huang's plans would be futile if the other states
united against him, so it was imperative that he do whatever it took to prevent
that unification from happening.  One of the ways he ensured this was to foster
a brain drain of sorts from the other states into the state of Qin by offering
generous sinecures to their scholars to move into his employ.  And to sweeten
the deal, scholars who did not defect he assassinated.  So Li Si and the
Emperor Qin Shi Huang were men who were clearly convinced of the power of
ideas.  So after Qin Shi Huang had ascended to the imperial throne, on the
advice of Li Si, he ordered a massive purge of any ideas which were not
congruent with his philosophy of governance.  All of the books from the other
schools were to be burned.  The historian Sima Qian described the event in the
Records of the Grand Historian as follows:

> Chancellor Li Si said: "I, your servant, propose that all historians' records
> other than those of Qin's be burned. With the exception of the academics
> whose duty includes possessing books, if anyone under heaven has copies of
> the [Classic of Poetry], [Classic of History], or the writings of the hundred
> schools of philosophy, they shall deliver them (the books) to the governor or
> the commandant for burning. Anyone who dares to discuss the Classic of Poetry
> or the Classic of History shall be publicly executed.  Anyone who uses
> history to criticize the present shall have his family executed. Any official
> who sees the violations but fails to report them is equally guilty. Anyone
> who has failed to burn the books after thirty days of this announcement shall
> be subjected to tattooing and be sent to build the Great Wall. The books that
> have exemption are those on medicine, divination, agriculture, and forestry.
> Those who have interest in laws shall instead study from officials."

In addition to this purge of books, Sima Qian's history tells that to drive the
point home, two years later 460 scholars whose thought was not politically
correct were buried alive.

So, what books survived this purge, and what was burned?  Perusing over the
Hundred Schools of Thought that I described earlier, it's clear that one of
these, in particular, really jived with the cutthroat politics that Qin Shi
Huang knew so well.  So, Legalism came out as the big winner from the burning
of books.  Confucianism survived as well since it was not entirely offensive to
the thought of Emperor Qin Shi Huang with its emphasis on the importance of
hierarchy and duty, but it survived in a diminished form.  It wasn't until the
following Han dynasty that there was a reaction against the Legalism of the Qin
dynasty, and a rehabilitation of Confucianism in Chinese intellectual culture.
Taoism sort of went under the radar since its rejection of worldly politics did
not really make it much of a threat.  But the big loser from all this was
Mohism, which with its touchy-feely ideas about universal love was not
concordant with Emperor Qin Shi Huang's will-to-power.

Now, the evidence for this event comes from the historian Sima Qian, who was
writing more than a century later and had his own motives, so it is not
generally believed to be an entirely trustworthy account.  But whether or not
this specific event happened as he claimed it to, the broader point I think
still stands, that ancient Chinese records were heavily censored by later
regimes, so things only survived if they were deemed acceptable.  If they
weren't they would either have been forgotten or contorted until they were.

So, with that gigantic caveat out of the way, we can finally dive in to the
earliest written record of Chinese astronomy in the Canon of Yao.  In
traditional Chinese history, Yao was a king, who was probably mythical, who
ruled even prior to the initial Xia dynasty, which itself was probably
mythical.  The most relevant part of the document goes like this:

> [Yao] commanded [the astronomers] Xi and Ho, in reverent accordance with
> (their observation of) the wide heavens, to calculate and delineate (the
> movements and appearances of) the sun, the moon, the stars, and the zodiacal
> spaces, and so to deliver respectfully the seasons to be observed by the
> people.  He separately commanded the second brother Xi to reside at Yu-yi, in
> what was called the Bright Valley, and (there) respectfully to receive as a
> guest the rising sun, and to adjust and arrange the labours of the spring.
> 'The day,' (said he), 'is of the medium length, and the star is in Niao ---
> you may thus exactly determine mid-spring. The people are dispersed (in the
> fields), and birds and beasts breed and copulate.' He further commanded the
> third brother Xi to reside at Nan-jiao, (in what was called the Brilliant
> Capital). To adjust and arrange the transformations of the summer, and
> respectfully-to observe the exact limit (of the shadow). 'The day,' (said
> he), 'is at its longest, and the star is in Huo --- you may thus exactly
> determine mid-summer.  The people are more dispersed; and birds and beasts
> have their feathers and hair thin, and change their coats.' He separately
> commanded the second brother He to reside at the west, in what was called the
> Dark Valley, and (there) respectfully to convoy the setting sun, and to
> adjust and arrange the completing labours of the autumn. 'The night' (said
> he), 'is of the medium length, and the star is in Xu --- you may thus exactly
> determine mid-autumn.  The people feel at ease, and birds and beasts have
> their coats in good condition.' He further commanded the third brother He to
> reside in the northern region, in what was called the Sombre Capital, and
> (there) to adjust and examine the changes of the winter. 'The day,' (said
> he), 'is at its shortest, and the star is in Mao --- you may thus exactly
> determine mid-winter.  The people, keep in their houses, and the coats of
> birds and beasts are downy and thick.' The [emperor] said, 'Ah! you, Xi and
> Ho, a round year consists of three hundred, sixty, and six days. [You are],
> by means of the intercalary month, [to] fix the four seasons, and complete
> (the period of) the year.  (Thereafter), the various officers being
> regulated, in accordance with this, all the works (of the year) will be fully
> performed.'

So we see in this short story that the main program of Chinese astronomy for
centuries to come has been laid out in the very earliest times.  We see, for
instance, that astronomy, like the rest of civilization, emanated out from the
emperor.  It is the emperor who commands his astronomers to observe the
heavens.  The astronomers, moreover, are expected to travel widely to make
their observations, to all corners of the land.  They are to observe the Sun,
Moon, planets, zodiacal signs, and seasons.  We see, too, that the purpose of
these observations is so that the appropriate rituals can be conducted at the
solstices and equinoxes and to fix the calendar.  There have been some theories
that the original motivation for these kinds of rituals around the solstices
may have stemmed from a fear that without their intervention the seasons might
continue indefinitely.  The summer would simply get hotter and hotter or the
winter would get colder and colder.  So man's active participation was needed
to regulate the changing of the seasons.  Later on, certainly by the time of
recorded history it seems that these rituals were conceived in a less literal
way, as a way of maintaining a harmony between the heavens and the earth.

Paying close attention to some of the details in this story we can also try to
estimate approximately when the story was originally written.  The text tells
us four stars that are associated with the solstices and equinoxes.  Niao
Hsing, literally the Bird Star, and the brightest star in Hyades, is associated
with spring.  Ta Ho, or Antares, but literally Great Fire, is associated with
summer.  Hsu is Beta Aquarius and is associated with autumn, and Mao is the
Pleiades and is associated with winter.  Now, the usual assumption when a
culture has associated a set of stars with the seasons is that these stars
would have been heliacally rising at the solstices or equinoxes, but
unfortunately this does not give a consistent set of dates in this story.  The
Pleiades had their heliacal rising coincide with the winter solstice around
1500 BC, but Beta Aquarius had its heliacal rising coincide with the autumnal
equinox around 350 BC, more than 11 centuries later.  An alternative
possibility is that the association between these stars and the solstices and
equinoxes was not a heliacal rising, but was where the Sun, in fact, was.  This
would have happened around 2000 BC.  In other words, around 2000 BC, during the
winter solstice, the Sun would have been near the Pleiades star cluster, and
during the summer solstice it would have been near Antares.  If this is the
meaning the story has it would be quite remarkable, because if the Sun is near
these stars, obviously you can't see them.  So it would have taken a quite
sophisticated set of observations and mental model of the heavens to infer that
the Sun was near the Pleiades on the winter solstice when you couldn't actually
see the Pleiades at that time.

At the end of the story, there is also a reference to the length of the year.
The emperor proclaims that the year is 366 days long.  Now, this may seem like
a rather poor value to use, being off by 3/4 of a day, but it is probable that
there was a convention to count any fraction of a day as a whole day, in
effect, rounding the length of the year up to a whole number.  The last detail
from the story worth dwelling on is the mention of an intercalary month.  Now,
while the story doesn't give any detail about how this was calculated, the fact
that there was an intercalary month implied that very early on the Chinese used
a lunar month and recognized that its length was not commensurate with the
length of the year and this required periodic adjustment.  So in this brief,
somewhat unassuming story we see quite a lot of sophistication in early Chinese
astronomy.

Well, the two main astronomers in this story, Hsi and Ho, also appear in a
later, more popular story.  This version of events may have been a corruption
of the burning of books and burning of scholars.  In this telling Hsi and Ho
were again astronomers of the emperor.  However, they were rather fond of the
bottle and neglectful of their duties.  One year, on the first day of autumn
there was a solar eclipse when the Sun was near the star of Arcturus.  Having
had no warning of this, the commoners panicked and wreaked havoc across the
kingdom.  The emperor, furious at Hsi and Ho for failing to predict the
eclipse, had the pair executed.

Now, it's possible that this story had some basis in reality, but even if it
did, the original event was probably more of a political conflict in which the
court astronomer ended up taking the losing side and was executed.  The story
about their crime being a failure to predict an eclipse would have been a later
embellishment.  That said, if we do take the story seriously as a record of an
actual solar eclipse, we can back out some possible dates that it might have
occurred on.  According to the story the eclipse happened in early autumn near
the star of Arcturus.  Such an eclipse happened on October 22, 2137 BC,
although there is another candidate on October 16, 1876 BC.  Now, in these
later tellings of the story the crime of Hsi and Ho was in their failure to
predict this eclipse, since predicting eclipses was one of the primary
functions of the court astronomers.  But it is more plausible that the original
conception of this tale was that the failure of Hsi and Ho was to *prevent* the
eclipse, not merely to predict it.  Incidentally, the names of the astronomers
in this oldest story, Hsi and Ho, may also have originally been a single name,
"Hsi-Ho" and derived from a mythical figure who was either the mother of the
Sun, or the chariot driver of the Sun.  This hapless duo were later
catasterized in Chinese astronomy and represented in the sky by a celestial
object called the Double Cluster in Perseus.

Well, I think I will leave it here for this month.  This episode was a somewhat
impressionistic overview of some of the ideas that were floating around in
ancient China and how they related to the heavens.  Next month we'll start to
move through the history of Chinese astronomy more systematically and exit the
realm of myth and into more trustworthy records.  I hope you'll join me then.
Until the next full moon, good night and clear skies.

## Additional References

* Needham, Science and Civilisation in China, Volume 3
