---
categories: episode
date: '2024-05-29'
description: After Wang Mang had usurped the Imperial throne, a disastrous series
  of reforms led to the collapse of his dynasty. The reestablishment of the Han Dynasty
  called for yet another calendar reform. About a millennium later, a group of officials,
  including the astronomer Shen Kuo, instigated a treacherous period in court politics
  by pressing for a radical set of reforms called the New Policies.
keywords:
- astronomy
- history
layout: episode
number: 42
title: A Tale of Two Reforms
---

## Transcript

Good evening, and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon, or
thereabouts.  My name is Joe Antognini.  To start off with, my apologies that
this episode is a little later than normal.  I was all set to record right on
schedule, but I ended up contracting a cold the day before I was supposed to
record.  So I took an extra couple of days to wait for my voice to get at least
somewhat back to normal.  But now it is and so the show must go on.

Well, last month we looked at some of the astronomical developments that
happened around the rise of the Xin dynasty in the early 1st century AD.  In
particular, the establishment of a new imperial dynasty demanded the
promulgation of a new calendar.  And the astronomer Liu Xin was up to the task
and created a calendar called the Triple Concordance system that wove
numerological significance into the lengths of the seasons, months, and
planetary motions.

Now, the new emperor, Wang Mang, had certainly hoped that the new dynasty he
inaugurated would outshine the great Han Dynasty in glory and stretch across
the centuries.  But it was not to be.  Wang Mang had lined things up for his
usurpation of the throne quite nicely in the palace.  He had aligned important
factions with him, in particular the Confucian court scholars.  But outside the
palace his standing was dicier.  At first it seems to have been the minor
officials who had misgivings.  Wang Mang was a die-hard Confucian, and the
Confucians, as a rule, tended to romanticize the Zhou Dynasty.  Confucius, of
course, lived during the Zhou Dynasty and scholars believed that the Zhou
Dynasty most properly embodied Confucian ideals.  So, as Wang Mang was setting
up his dynasty and overhauling the government, he wanted things done right.  He
wanted them done the Confucian way.  But the true Confucian way hadn't been
done for many centuries, so what exactly it was wasn't clear.  Wang Mang
employed an army of scholars to scour the ancient texts for clues about the
proper mechanism for deciding this or that.  And, in the end, not much got
decided, and what did get decided took a long time to happen.  It did not help
matters that Wang Mang was a quintessential micromanager.  So officials out in
the country were unable to do anything about the problems they had until they
got an answer from the emperor himself, and the emperor was taking a long time
to come to any answer at all.

Now this in itself may not have been that big of a problem for the officials.
I'm sure many officials throughout history would have been quite happy to sit
around doing nothing for years and protest that they were just waiting for word
from the emperor before they could get to work.  But one of the projects that
was on Emperor Wang's plate was to revamp the compensation scheme, and as a
consequence of this, until it was completed, none of the officials got paid,
and this lasted years.  To support themselves, these officials started to
demand bribes, and this, in turn, started to breed resentment among the common
folk.

But, after a few years Wang Mang's work restoring a Confucian system of
government based on his understanding of Zhou dynasty practices started to
yield fruit, and these policies began to be implemented.  But unfortunately, to
continue the metaphor, the fruit these policies bore was not as good as he had
hoped.  A representative debacle was a series of reforms that introduced a new
system of coinage.  During the Han Dynasty, the vast majority of coins were
made of bronze and were called qian, or cash coins in English.  They were round
with a square hole in the middle.  You could then keep your money organized by
threading a string through a stack of these coins.  Typically coins would be
strung together in groups of a thousand, and this was a standard monetary unit
that merchants would do business with.  Well, based on Zhou Dynasty practices,
Wang Mang introduced a rather baroque coinage system consisting of 18 different
kinds of coins, with varying shapes, materials, and denominations.  Some of
these were made of tortoise shells and cowrie shells.  And some were quite easy
to forge.  Use of the earlier Han Dynasty coins was outlawed.  These diktats
were so heavy handed that trade almost completely collapsed over the next few
years.

Another even more catastrophic policy was the introduction, or reintroduction
in Wang Mang's eyes, of an old farming system called the well-field system.
Under this system Wang Mang effectively nationalized all land ownership
overnight.  Private land ownership became forbidden.  Eight families would be
assigned to work on a square plot of land.  The land was divided up into a 3x3
grid, and each family would get one of the eight divisions on the periphery of
the grid.  These divisions would be around 20 acres or so.  Anything the
families grew on their own land they could keep.  The central plot in the
middle was assigned to the state, and the eight families were to work on the
middle plot collectively and hand over all produce from that plot to the state.
Naturally, instituting this system was a tremendous upheaval to the commoners
and the big land owning aristocracy was none too happy with losing all of their
land.  In the end this system survived only three years.

But this wasn't the end of Wang Mang's disastrous interventions into his
country's economy.  He declared a state monopoly on salt, fishing, timber, and
worst of all, alcohol.  He imposed a so-called sloth tax which taxed the
unemployed.  Consequently many poor urbanites and people living in marginal
lands were forced into slavery to pay the tax.  He imposed the first income tax
in China at a mind boggling rate of 10 percent.

All this is to say that while Wang Mang had the Confucian scholars firmly
behind him, over a decade he had turned essentially everyone else in the
country against him.  As the years passed, revolts began to pop up in various
corners of the country, usually minor officials who rallied large numbers of
disaffected peasants.  The first few of these did not pose a serious threat to
Wang Mang's rule, but in time the revolts grew in scale.  These culminated in
the Red Eyebrows movement, so called because the participants painted their
eyebrows red so that they could distinguish themselves from the Emperor's
forces.  Ultimately the Red Eyebrows managed to sack the capital city and
beheaded Wang Mang.  Apparently the peasants kicked his head around like a
soccer ball and someone even cut out the late emperor's tongue and ate it.

Well, after this turn of events there was a chaotic period of a few years as a
number of members of the old Han family claimed the imperial throne only to be
quickly deposed.  But ultimately one of them, Liu Xiu, the
great-great-great-great grandson of Emperor Jing, came out on top.  In 25 AD he
had more or less won control of the Han Kingdom and put forward his claim to
rule the entire empire, and after another 12 years of hard fighting he managed
to subdue the entire empire under his rule, beginning the second half of the
Han Dynasty, known as the Later Han, or Eastern Han because the new emperor
shifted the capital from the sacked city of Chang'an to the eastern city of
Luoyang.

Well, despite the chaos of the broader political context, the astronomers seem
to have kept right on doing their work throughout all of this.  In 32 AD, when
Liu Xiu was well on his way to gaining control over the entire empire but still
had a good five years to go, astronomers began to note that their observations
were not matching their predictions.  They had been using the new Triple
Concordance system that we talked about in the last episode, that was
inaugurated by the new Xin Dynasty.  But the moon's actual position was ahead
of its predicted position by about a day.  The astronomers brought their
concerns to the new Emperor, but understandably the Emperor felt he had more
pressing matters to attend to at the moment, so the issues with the calendar
were set aside for the time being.

Over the next half century the predictions from the official calendar continued
to lag.  During this period some of the astronomers appear to have rebelled
against the official timekeeping system and unofficially developed an
alternative system that was more in line with their observations, called the
Quarter Remainder system.  But until the emperor officially instituted a new
calendar, these alternative predictions were simply for the astronomers'
private enjoyment.

The issues with the old Triple Concordance system from the defunct Xin dynasty
continued to fester until 85 AD.  By this point two things had happened: first,
the discrepancies had become too large to sweep under the rug, and second,
things had settled down in the empire.  The emperor of the time, Emperor Zhang,
was the third emperor of the Later Han Dynasty and his reign is regarded as
being one of the high points of the era.  The emperor asked his astronomers why
their predictions were so poor.  The astronomers protested that they knew that
the predictions were poor, but the calendar was the calendar and it wasn't in
their power to change it.  But if the emperor so wished, it was, of course,
within his prerogative to change it.  Having now reestablished the Han Dynasty
on firm footing, it did seem to be an appropriate time to promulgate a new
calendar, so the emperor ordered that it be done.  Fortunately for the
astronomers, the work involved in this calendar reform seems to have been
rather limited since they had essentially already developed the new calendar
years before and had just been using it unofficially.  So this particular
calendar reform was quite fast.  Within a few months of the emperor hauling the
astronomers before him to account for their errors he was giving his blessing
to the new Quarter Remainder calendar.

It's at this point, shortly after this latest calendar reform of 85 AD that
reestablishes the Han Dynasty, that the astronomer Jia Kui enters the picture.
Jia Kui was a respected astronomer, but he wasn't among those tapped to lead
the calendar reform.  Not long after it had been promulgated, he was, however,
brought in to review a peculiarity of the new calendar.  In general, the months
alternated between short months of 29 days and long months of 30 days.  In this
new calendar, the first month in the overall cycle was assigned to be a full
month of 30 days rather than a short month of 29 days as had been customary.
With a team of 10 astronomers Jia Kui was able to determine that the
traditional practice of starting the cycle with a short month was correct.

It seems that in the course of his review, however, Jia Kui discovered some
more fundamental problems with the Quarter Remainder system.  The issue he
discovered is that a calendar that predicts things like the solstices or phases
of the moon essentially has two components: the period of the phenomenon, and
then the origin, or the starting point.  So, in modern terms, the calendar
might specify that the time from new moon to new moon was, say, 29.53085 days
as it was in the Quarter Remainder system.  And then the calendar would also
specify that, for example, midnight of December 25, 162 BC was a new moon.
Then, to predict the date of the new moon in future, you would, in effect, just
add repeatedly add 29.53085 days to the start date of December 25, 162 BC.
This would then enumerate all of the full moons in your calendar.  Now, this
meant that your calendar could be inaccurate in two ways: the period could be
off, or the origin point could be off.  If the period is off, then the calendar
might start out making good predictions, but over time the predictions will get
worse and worse as the errors from the incorrect period accumulate.  If the
origin is incorrect but the period is correct, then there will always just be a
systematic error in your predictions.  You'll always be off by the same amount
and it won't get any better or worse over time.  What Jia Kui figured out was
that although the new Quarter Remainder system was making better predictions
than the old Triple Concordance system, it basically got there by accident.
The new Quarter Remainder system actually had a worse estimate of the period of
the moon's orbit, but it happened to also choose a more inaccurate origin point
and these two errors had essentially cancelled out in the late first century.
But because the period was worse, this happy state of affairs couldn't last,
and eventually the new calendar would start making worse predictions than the
old one.

So, how did Jia Kui know that the origin point for the new Quarter Remainder
system was wrong?  After all, its origin was in 162 BC and of course Jia Kui
was not around then.  And at any rate, any recorded observations from that time
were also available to Liu Xin when he developed the previous Triple
Concordance system.  Jia Kui's main innovation was that he realized that new
moons and solar eclipses were not independent events.  Generally speaking,
determining when the new moon is is very difficult because the moon passes very
close to the Sun and can't be seen.  So you have to infer it from other
observations at different times.  But this means that recordings of new moons
in past records were not all that accurate, and in fact most of the recorded
new moons were not real measurements but just dates that the calendar of the
time said was a new moon.  The one exception is if there happens to be a solar
eclipse.  If you observe a solar eclipse, total or partial, you know precisely
when the new moon is.  Prior to this point in Chinese astronomy there hadn't
really been any connection between eclipses and phases of the moon.  In fact
past records had a clear systematic bias where solar eclipses almost always
were noted as happening on the last day of the month or sometimes even the day
before that, which of course, was impossible.  But at the time no one seemed to
notice that this was an issue.  As I mentioned a few episodes back, at the time
there were a few different theories of eclipses floating around and the idea
that the eclipse is caused by one celestial body shadowing another hadn't
become widely accepted.  In more astrological theories the idea was simply that
the moon would sap energy from the Sun when it shared the same lunar mansion.
So observing a solar eclipse a day before the new moon wasn't necessarily a
contradictory observation in those terms.  But with Jia Kui's insight that
solar eclipses could only happen on new moons, he could use the seventy
recorded solar eclipses he had available to him to determine both the period of
a new moon and an origin point with far higher precision than was possible
previously.

Well, Jia Kui did not only work on calendrical matters.  He was also very
interested in the path of the moon on the sky and articulated the Nine Roads of
the Moon which I mentioned briefly in a previous episode.  Now, the Nine Roads
of the Moon as a phrase seems to have had a long history in Chinese astronomy,
but it does not seem to have meant a consistent theory of the Moon's motion
until Jia Kui's time.  Here, one of Jia Kui's main innovations was to recognize
that the Moon's motion should be measured with respect to the ecliptic rather
than the celestial equator.  As I talked about at some length when I went over
the system of lunar mansions, Chinese astronomy was primarily based around
measurements with respect to the celestial equator.  This works quite well for
precision timing, but isn't as good a system for measuring the motions of the
Sun, Moon, and planets, since these bodies move closer to the ecliptic.  To see
the problems this creates, imagine that the Moon's orbit were exactly on the
ecliptic and perfectly circular so that the Moon moved at a constant angular
speed around the Earth.  If you are measuring the Moon's position with ecliptic
coordinates, you would just find that the Moon's ecliptic longitude increases
linearly with time.  In this coordinate system it's very easy to see that the
Moon's motion is constant.  However, if you instead measure the Moon's motion
using right ascension, which is effectively your longitude along the celestial
equator, you won't see that it increases perfectly linearly.  Instead, when the
Moon is on the celestial equator, its apparent motion in right ascension will
be smaller than it otherwise would be because it's also increasing in
declination.  Conversely, when the Moon is at its maximum or minimum
declination, its apparent motion in right ascension will be larger than average
because firstly all its motion is in right ascension and not in declination,
and secondly because it's above the equator, the lines of constant right
ascension are closer together.  So if you plot the Moon's right ascension as a
function of time, you'll see that it oscillates in a curve that is almost, but
not quite sinusoidal.  So in this coordinate system, the motion of this
fictitious simple Moon looks a lot more complicated than it really is.  Now,
the real Moon, of course, has an orbit which is not perfectly circular, and
what's more it precesses as well, so its motion is quite a bit more
complicated, even in ecliptic coordinates.  But when you are measuring its
position using an equatorial system and you see that its motion is complicated,
it's hard to tease apart which parts of its motion are complicated because the
moon really has complicated motion, and which parts just look complicated
because you used a bad coordinate system.

At any rate, Jia Kui's innovation here was to measure the position of the Moon
with respect to the ecliptic rather than the celestial equator.  For this
purpose he added a new ring to the official armillary sphere which was used for
these kinds of measurements.  However, in a tale as old as time, Jia Kui's
genius was not immediately recognized and it apparently took many years to
persuade the court astronomers to make their measurements this new way.

Well, based on the name, the "Nine Roads," Chinese astronomers had long
recognized that certain features of the Moon's motion varied in a nine-fold
way.  The Moon's orbit is not exactly on the ecliptic, but is somewhat inclined
to it by about five degrees.  But the position of maximum declination precesses
with a period of about 19 years.  This means that on some months you'll see the
Moon pass right on top of a star, and then on other months you may see it pass
five degrees above or below that same star.  The older references to the Nine
Roads seem to have divided up the path of the Moon into the ecliptic path, and
then four paths above the ecliptic, and four paths below it.  But the Moon's
orbit is not just inclined with respect to the ecliptic, it's also eccentric.
And this means that its speed along its orbit varies over the course of the
month.  Jia Kui seems to have been the first to realize that this speed varies,
and the position of maximum speed precesses with a period of about nine years.
Ultimately, Jia Kui was able to derive a theory of the Moon's motion that
accounted for its variable speed along its orbit.  This way, when making
predictions of the Moon's position in the sky, a correction could be made to
its average motion to get a more accurate prediction.

Jia Kui raised these issues late in his life, both with the calendar, and with
the way that lunar and planetary positions were being measured.  But his ideas
were not met with immediate acclaim and he died not too long later so he was
unable to defend his ideas as forcefully as he otherwise might have if he had
still been around.  The court astronomers seem to have understood that
something was wrong with the way they were making their measurements, but
didn't seem to fully understand Jia Kui's ideas, and, more to the point, didn't
seem to understand his solutions.  So they began incorporating a series of
corrections to their measurements of the position of the Moon, but these
corrections were based on a gross simplification of Jia Kui's theory and
weren't even self consistent.

There is actually another example of a disconnect between what we might
anachronistically call the theorists of the day with the observers.  Another
astronomer of the time, named Huo Rong, published another critique of the
established astronomical practices, this time about the way that water clock
measurements were done.  It seems that in this era the water clocks would be
run twice a day: once during the daytime, and another time at night.  As I
mentioned in the last episode, the astronomers would place a floatation device
on the surface of the water with a vertical rod attached to it.  Then they
would measure the height of the water by comparing the gradations on the rod to
a horizontal crossbar above the water clock.  Because the length of day and
night varied over the course of the year, you'd need a longer rod with more
gradations on it during days near the summer solstice, and a shorter rod with
fewer gradations on it during the night.  And similarly around the winter
solstice you'd need a longer rod during the night and a shorter rod during the
day.  According to the established practice, the court astronomers would
linearly increase the length of the rod used during the day from the winter
solstice to the summer solstice, and then linearly decrease the lengths of the
rods they used during the night.  And from the summer solstice to the winter
solstice they'd do the opposite.  We actually saw way back in the episodes on
Babylonian and Egyptian astronomy that they had a very similar scheme.  But Huo
Rong pointed out that this system was not correct.  In reality the change in
daylight throughout the year is more sinusoidal, it's not a zigzag.  Close to
the solstices it hardly changes at all, and close to the equinoxes it changes
much more rapidly than you'd otherwise expect.  The emperor asked his court
astronomers to respond to this critique and they said that while it made sense,
they had no other choice.  They were simply following the established rules for
making these measurements, which is precisely what the emperor required of
them.

Well, a widely accepted solution for how to deal with these issues didn't
really come until Zhang Heng, who was active in the early 2nd century AD and
came of age around the time of Jia Kui's death.  The essential problem in both
cases, but especially for measurements of the moon and planets was that there
needed to be a way to convert between equatorial coordinates and ecliptic
coordinates.  In modern mathematical terms, this is essentially a problem of
spherical geometry, and although it's not too hard to set it up, even in modern
notation the conversion is rather ugly.  But even elementary trigonometry
didn't show up in China until the 8th century AD.  So in an era where
trigonometric functions weren't recognized, converting between ecliptic and
equatorial coordinates was a very thorny problem indeed.  Zhang Heng solved
this problem in a very practical way.  He simply constructed a physical sphere
and carefully inscribed an equator and ecliptic, inclined at the appropriate
angle, and then inscribed gradations on this sphere.  Having done this he could
simply measure for himself what the conversion was.  He managed to do this down
to a resolution in longitude of about four degrees.  This meant that for the
position of the Sun, every four day span would have an empirically measured
conversion between its equatorial position to its ecliptic position.

Incidentally, if Zhang Heng's solution to a problem in spherical trigonometry
of literally constructing a sphere and looking at it seems to be overly
simplistic, this kind of a solution was in use at the greatest telescopes in
the world within living memory.  One of the difficulties that telescopes have
is that you oftentimes want to observe an object for a long period of time.
But due to the rotation of the Earth, the objects are constantly moving in the
sky, so you have to move the telescope to track them.  The simplest way to do
this is with what is called an equatorial mount.  The idea is that you align
your mount with the north celestial pole and then you have two motors: one
changes the declination and the other changes the right ascension.  Then it's
easy to track an object, you just have to drive your right ascension motor at a
constant rate.  This kind of a mount is quite simple in principle.  But
mechanically it starts to introduce difficulties when you're building a very
large multi-meter class telescope.  The precision of the alignment has to be
very high and the whole structure needs to be extremely stable, but the odd
angles that you have to mount things for an equatorial mount make this very
difficult to achieve.  Because of this, in the second half of the twentieth
century, very large telescopes started to use altazimuth mounts, where one
motor would control the altitude --- how high you're pointing above the horizon
--- and the other would control the azimuth, the angle with respect to north.
This is much simpler to build mechanically, but it presents a problem for
tracking.  Now, to track an object, you can't just whirr one motor at a
constant rate.  Both motors will need to be going, and they're going to have to
change how fast they're going over time.  This is essentially another version
of the spherical trigonometry problem that Zhang Heng was trying to solve.
Before the advent of cheap computers, calculating how to drive these two motors
on the fly was a very challenging task.  And the solution that some telescopes
used was the same as Zhang Heng.  They would have a kind of "shadow telescope,"
that was a much smaller physical analog of the telescope.  They could then
drive the shadow telescope equatorially, and then just read off the
corresponding altitude and azimuth and feed those readings into the main motors
of the real telescope.

Well, Zhang Heng seems to have had a knack for constructing ingenious
scientific instruments.  Although he was one of the greatest of China's
astronomers, he is perhaps even better known in the field of geology for having
built the first seismoscope.  The details that survive of this device are
tantalizing.  There's enough detail to guess at how it worked with enough
imagination, but the description is not quite thorough enough to allow for a
definitive reconstruction.  But the basic idea seems to have been that there
was a large urn with a pendulum inside.  The pendulum was surrounded by a ring
on which sat eight balls.  If there was an earthquake, it would set the
pendulum swinging and it would knock one of the balls off its perch and the
ball would roll out a spout.  This would then indicate not only that there had
been an earthquake, but also the direction had occurred in.  The most famous
story of Zhang Heng's seismoscope tells of a time when the seismoscope went off
but no one in the palace felt an earthquake, so it was generally believed that
the device was broken.  Then, two days later, messengers arrived at the capital
and reported that an earthquake had occurred in Longxi, a province hundreds of
miles away, in precisely the direction that the seismoscope had indicated.
Although it is a good story, it is probably apocryphal because it only shows
up in the later records.  But Zhang Heng was certainly interested in detecting
earthquakes that couldn't be felt.  After all, at the time, earthquakes were
similar to solar eclipses and comets --- they were indications from the Heavens
that the earth had come out of harmony with the heavens, and usually this meant
that there were problems with governance.  And just as glancing solar eclipses,
which were barely detectable, provided an important early warning sign to the
emperor that he needed to change something soon, so too would a small
earthquake that could barely be felt.  If the emperor could course correct
quickly he could stave off a bigger disaster.

Although the seismoscope was Zhang Heng's most famous invention, he developed a
number of other advances, too.  Besides the armillary sphere he used to convert
between ecliptic and equatorial coordinates, his other main astronomical
innovation was an improvement to the water clocks.  He realized that the
problem of the flow rate slowing as the water level decreased could be solved
by adding in an extra reservoir as a regulator.  This could keep the main tank
topped up at all times so that its flow rate was constant.  Then, the amount of
water that flowed out would increase linearly over time.

Well, I don't want to give the impression that Zhang Heng was only concerned
with building new equipment.  He was deeply involved in what we would today
consider to be more theoretical aspects of astronomy as well.  Zhang Heng wrote
extensively on cosmology and cosmogony.  In fact, we've already touched on his
most important theories in Episode 38 when I went over some of the estimates of
the size of the heavens and the earth, so I won't go over them again.

Well, there is much more that could be said about astronomy during the Han
Dynasty.  There was, for instance, in the year 175 AD, a ferocious formal
debate in the court before all the officials about calendrical issues, in
particular the origin point of the calendar.  But in the interest of time I
will have to skip over that episode and instead move forward almost a
millennium, to the Song Dynasty, so that we can talk a little bit about the
life of one of the other great astronomers in Chinese history, Shen Kuo.

Now, given that we're skipping over so much time, and that Shen Kuo's work was
intimately involved with the politics of his day, I think it would be
worthwhile to briefly sketch what all was going on at the time.  In the
intervening years the Han Dynasty had fallen and for several centuries the
empire fragmented and was ruled by a variety of independent kingdoms.  But in
the late 7th century this chaotic period came to an end with the rise of the
Sui Dynasty which managed to unite a region similar in size to the Han Dynasty
at its greatest extent.  The Sui Dynasty was in some ways a latter-day Qin
Dynasty in that both were able to overpower the various independent kingdoms
that ruled China, but were internally unstable and were quickly replaced by
more stable dynasties: the Han Dynasty after the Qin Dynasty in the early
Imperial period, and the Tang Dynasty after the Sui Dynasty in the middle
Imperial period.

Well, the Tang Dynasty persisted for about three centuries, and much like the
Han Dynasty it, too, had a brief interruption in the middle when an ambitious
empress usurped the throne and declared a new dynasty.  Well, to quote the way
Gregory of Tours opened his own history, during this time many things happened,
some of them good, and some of them bad.  But for our purposes two changes
during the Tang Dynasty were particularly important.  The first was the
development of the system of Imperial examination.  Now, some form of imperial
examination had existed as far back as the Han Dynasty.  I mentioned in Episode
38 that during the Han Dynasty the Taixue was founded, an imperial university
for aspiring scholar officials to study at.  But during this period one's
pedigree mattered much more than any test results in determining who to appoint
to official positions.  And, at any rate, an individual needed a certain level
of nobility to be eligible to take the test to begin with.

But during the Tang Dynasty the scope of the imperial examinations expanded
significantly and many new categories of examination were introduced.  One
still needed some degree of nobility to be eligible to sit the examination, but
good performance on an exam was now a factor in appointments to good positions
in the bureaucracy.  Then later on, during the Song Dynasty, the imperial
examinations became much more democratized.  In principle anyone could take an
exam, and rather than being one route that could get you an official
appointment, it became virtually the only way to get an appointment.

The other important change that came during this period was land reform.  If
you happen to know any urbanists, they will tell you that everything in
economics and politics boils down to land use policy.  Well, nowhere does this
seem to be more true than in the history of China.  Earlier I talked a little
bit about how one of the many disastrous policies that led to the downfall of
Wang Mang's short lived Xin Dynasty was a land reform that introduced the
so-called well-field system.  Well, somewhat prior to the Tang Dynasty one of
the regional emperors introduced a new land reform that was similar in spirit
to the old well-field system, and after the Sui Dynasty united the various
independent kingdoms, this system was exported throughout China.

This new system was called the equal field system and, like the earlier
well-field system, in this system all land also belonged to the Emperor.  But
rather than assigning families to equal sized plots of land in a grid, the
equal field system, despite the name, was somewhat more flexible as people
would be assigned larger or smaller plots of land depending on their ability to
work it.  So a man who owned an ox would be granted more land than a man who
didn't have an ox.  Well, as with the earlier well-field system, this system
was intended to break the grip of the powerful land-owning nobility.  And, just
as an aside here, one of the things that those of us in the modern world tend
not to understand about these kinds of feudal systems is that the power
structures were not set up so much with the aristocracy opposing the people.
There was, of course, some degree of this to ensure that the common people
stayed in line.  But realistically, the commoners, whether in Imperial China or
medieval Europe were for the most part dirt poor, totally unorganized and
weren't a real threat to anyone.  Instead the main dynamic was the monarch
against the nobility.  The nobles were always jealously guarding their
landholdings and privileges.  The monarch, meanwhile, although he had nominal
allegiance of the nobility and could extract some taxes from his entire domain,
was always had to be working to make sure no nobles were getting so powerful
that they might become a threat.  So this kind of a land reform was a perfect
way to put the nobles down a peg or two.  The difficulty was that these things
never seemed to last long.  Anytime there was a famine or flood or some other
disaster there would be masses of peasants who would be reduced to penury and
at the brink of starvation.  The nobility would then bring them on as servants
into their household, taking their land along with them.  So, by the later part
of the Tang Dynasty the equal field system had effectively become dead letter.
And, particularly towards the end of the Tang Dynasty, the power of the Emperor
was once again in decline and the country was effectively divided into a
patchwork of principalities and the nobility had gained the upper hand.

So once the first emperor of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Taizu had conquered
these various kingdoms and centralized power again, there was for good reason a
sense in the court that the nobility still had too much land and too much
power.  Well, founding a new dynasty is always a precarious business, so
Emperor Taizu was not in a position to do much about this problem.  But after
about a century some new and radical ideas started floating around the court.
The principal driver behind these ideas was a man named Wang Anshi.  Wang Anshi
came from a family of imperial scholars and did very well on his own exams.  In
the subsequent years he was appointed to various posts throughout the empire,
and rose through the ranks over time.  Being out among the people over all
these years, rather than holed up at the imperial palace deep in the
machinations of palace intrigue, gave him a very tangible sense of which
government policies were working and which weren't.  And in Wang Anshi's
estimation, almost all of them weren't.  He recognized a few fundamental
problems with the social structure of his day.  Most of the people were
farmers, but they held only a small fraction of the arable land.  To survive
they had to take out extortionate loans from the few large landholders.  These
large landholders, in turn, generally did not pay much if any tax.  And with
little tax revenue, public infrastructure, particularly around irrigation and
water management, had been neglected.

So, over the years, Wang Anshi had various ideas about how this situation could
be improved and in 1058 he collected these thoughts and wrote a 10,000 word
memorandum to the Emperor.  The Emperor of the time, Emperor Renzong, gave the
ideas no further thought, but the ideas attracted the attention of some members
of his court.

Well, a few years later Emperor Renzong had died and was succeeded by Emperor
Yingzong, but Emperor Yingzong had always been sickly and died of some illness
a few years into his reign.  So Emperor Yingzong was then succeeded by Emperor
Shenzong.  Emperor Shenzong, unlike many of the emperors who preceded him, had
ambitions.  He wanted to expand the size of his empire, particularly by pushing
its boundaries to the north.  There there had long been a tenuous peace with
the Western Xia and Khitan Empires.  But he recognized that this would be a
significant military endeavour, and as such, it required funds, more than the
imperial treasury could support when he took the throne.  But fortunately for
him there seemed to be a ready-made solution.  Wang Anshi had spent the last
ten years making the case for his reforms, called the New Policies, which
would, among other things, generate substantial new tax revenue.  So, after all
this time, Wang Anshi had finally found the emperor's ear.  He was called to
the court, promoted to Chancellor, and given the power to implement his New
Policies.

For those of you more familiar with American history, some historians have
drawn a parallel between Wang Anshi's New Policies and the New Deal of the
1930s.  Both were quite radical reimaginings of what the government could do in
a very short period of time, both had somewhat Keynesian undertones, both had
mixed results, with some policies being more successful than others, and both
drew fierce opposition.

Now, enumerating all of the reforms in Wang Anshi's New Policies program would
take us too far afield, but the main highlights were a new uniform system of
taxation that assessed the tax simply based on the size of the land and an
assessment of its quality regardless of whether the owner was an aristocrat or
not.  There was also a program to provide loans to farmers for seeds at a fixed
low interest rate.  Another program aimed at regulating commodity prices, and
in some cases instituted government monopolies on certain commodities like
salt.

Well, philosophically, Wang Anshi's reforms were most closely aligned with the
school of legalism that I discussed a few episodes back.  His reforms were a
fairly radical break from past practices, and emphasized strong centralization
and effective governance, all important pillars of legalism.  But not everyone
in the Song court was a legalist.  To the contrary, the most popular
philosophical school was Confucianism, as it had been for centuries.  And the
most fervent Confucians were deeply opposed to the New Policies of Wang Anshi.
As Confucians, they could perhaps support slow, gradual reforms, but certainly
not the abrupt, radical changes that Wang Anshi was proposing.  This was a
recipe for chaos.  And anyway these more conservative Confucians were skeptical
that the New Policies would do much good for the economy at all.  Furthermore,
the New Policies were plainly aimed at reducing the wealth and power of the
aristocracy, but keeping the aristocracy happy was critical to maintaining
social stability in the state.

Well, when Emperor Shenzong decided to back the New Policies, the fate of the
conservative Confucian faction was sealed.  The reformers under Wang Anshi did
not play softball.  When one of their ranks was appointed to some high
position, they would demote anyone under them who was not with the program, and
in the case of especially outspoken critics, they would appoint them to some
minor post in a distant province, effectively exiling them.

One of the officials who was caught up in this purge was a man named Su Shi.
Although Su Shi was nominally an official, he was best known for his poetry.
In fact, today he is recognized as among the most important poets in Chinese
letters, but even in his own day his poetry was wildly popular.  Even the
illiterate knew his poetry and would sing his poems in the streets.  Well, Su
Shi was not above inserting some biting political commentary into his poetry.
One of his poems, for instance, criticized the salt monopoly that had been
instituted as a part of the New Policies.  Another had noted that whenever the
money for seed loans arrived in the county seats, there was always an increase
in the amount of alcohol in the town, but the peasants always seemed to go away
empty-handed.  These kinds of writings had gotten him exiled to Hangzhou where
he was appointed to governor.  This was not really too much of a punishment.
They pay was good, the environs were beautiful, and he had the freedom to
continue working on his poetry.  But, most importantly for the reformers, out
in Hangzhou he couldn't cause any trouble at court.  It's in this period that
Su Shi really came into his own as a poet.

Well, in the mid 1070s, Su Shi was visited at his outpost by Shen Kuo, who is
the main subject of this segment of the narrative.  To back up somewhat and
introduce Shen Kuo, Shen Kuo was born in the south in 1031.  He was a real
beneficiary of the reforms of the imperial examination system.  His father had
been a fairly low level official, and his mother was from a similar social
status.  In older times, Shen Kuo, too, would have simply been a low-level
official in an out of the way province.  But he had done so well in his exams
that he earned the attention of the imperial court and was appointed to the
bureau of the treasury.  But he seems to have had a particular knack for
engineering and mathematics, so he was soon promoted to be the director of
hydraulic works, and he had distinguished himself so well that within a decade
he had been appointed to be the head of the astronomical bureau.

Well, not long after his appointment to astronomer royale, the Emperor sent him
on a mission to check up on Su Shi and see how the great poet was faring out in
the boondocks.  Now, in his time at Court, Shen Kuo had ended up becoming a
close ally of Wang Anshi.  Shen Kuo's engineering skills were put to good use
in dredging an important canal near the capital, which was a component of the
New Policies.  And Shen Kuo further impressed by showing that the silt he
recovered could be used as a fertilizer.   Eventually, Wang Anshi had moved
Shen Kuo into his closest circle of allies.

Well, during his visit with Su Shi, Shen Kuo copied down a number of the poet's
poems.  When he got back to court, he read them aloud and declared that the
poems insulted the Imperial Court and that the "expressions were all abusive
and hateful."  Despite Shen Kuo's snitching, nothing seems to have happened
immediately.  But a few years later, two other members of Wang Anshi's faction
seem to have become alarmed at the growing popularity of Su Shi's poetry and
they brought the matter back up and formally charged him with "denouncing the
imperial chariot with great irreverence," essentially treason.  This was a very
serious charge, in fact, one of the so-called "10 abominations," for which the
punishment was immediate execution and which was hardly ever commuted by the
Emperor.  The resulting trial, called the Crow Terrace Poetry Trial, was one of
the most important events in the history of China in establishing the scope of
artistic freedom and speech.

The trial seems to have been something like a graduate seminar in literary
criticism, but with much higher stakes.  The evidence in question was simply
the corpus of poems that Su Shi had written over the years and it was up to the
prosecution and defense to argue that the poems should be interpreted this way
or that, either as an insult to the emperor, or simply a suggestion of how
policies could be improved.  After all, as a great poet, Su Shi did not exactly
come right out and say precisely what he thought, so what were the implications
of his poems and just how far did those implications go?  Another facet of Su
Shi's defense was a legendary oath that Emperor Taizu, the first emperor of the
Song Dynasty, had taken.  Supposedly he had inscribed on a pillar the order to
not kill the scholars of his court.  During their coronation, the Song Emperors
would ritually swear this oath.  And to raise the stakes even higher, it was
not merely Su Shi arguing in his own defense, although he was the central
figure.  There were thirty other people charged as accessories to his alleged
crimes.  If his poetry was treasonous, anyone who aided him in publishing or
disseminating his work was also guilty of conspiracy and would be subject to
similarly harsh punishment.

Well, in the end Su Shi was judged to be guilty of his crimes, but his popular
fame as a poet did at least help him to get his punishment of decapitation
commuted, which was very lucky for him.  Instead he was once again sent into
political exile.  This exile was much more severe than his earlier exile.
Previously he had been appointed the governor of a nice province, had a good
salary and lived on a beautiful estate.  This time around he was sent to a much
more remote location and placed under house arrest, and while he was appointed
to some minor office, he was given no salary and essentially lived in poverty
during this time.  But, for what it is worth, the poetry that Su Shi produced
during this time is generally considered to be the best of his career.

Well, all this is to say that the factional politics in the Song Court were no
joke and the political winds could quickly shift.  While Shen Kuo had clearly
chosen the right faction to join early in his career, his own good fortune was
not to last.  By the late 1070s the consequences of Wang Anshi's New Policies
were starting to make themselves felt, and this was not all for the good.  Part
of this was certainly flaws in the reforms or in their execution, but bad luck
also played a role.  In the middle of the decade there had been a major drought
which resulted in a famine, and to make matters worse in 1075 a comet appeared
in the skies, which was an omen that things were going very badly indeed.  As a
consequence of this Wang Anshi retired from public life around this time and
the energy around the reform project was diminished.  From the Emperor's
perspective this outcome was acceptable.  His main interest had always been in
increasing tax revenue so that he could attack the kingdoms to his north.  By
1081 he felt that the New Policies, whatever their shortcomings, had at least
produced enough revenue and raised a large enough army that he could begin his
attack.

At this point, Shen Kuo's career had taken him into the military and he had
been given command of a force in Inner Mongolia.  The first year and a half of
his command was a resounding success.  Shen Kuo successfully fended off attacks
from the Western Xia, which was his primary objective, and captured a few
military targets to boot.  But then he had some differences of opinion with
another officer in the area, and at least according to the accounts this other
officer made a number of strategic blunders and in an ensuing attack, some
60,000 men under Shen Kuo's command were killed.

That same year, the Emperor's forces suffered an even more catastrophic defeat
at Yongle.  This battle, in effect, determined the outcome of the war.  The
Emperor Shenzong was crest stricken upon learning of this defeat and felt that
his entire life's purpose had been for nothing.  The reforms he had implemented
hadn't turned out all that well, and their primary purpose, funding this war
effort, had also failed.  He nominally kept the war going for another few
years, but his heart wasn't in it, or anything else for that matter, and he
died shortly thereafter.

The death of Emperor Shenzong saw the pendulum of reform start to swing back
hard in the other direction.  The first priority of the subsequent emperor,
Emperor Zhezong, was to roll back the New Policies of Wang Anshi.  Everyone who
was in in the previous court was now out, and everyone who was out was now in.
Shen Kuo, of course, was in the innermost circle of the reformers, and the
military disaster that occurred under his watch was as good an excuse as any to
get rid of him.  Shen Kuo was stripped of his titles and official positions and
sent to live in the countryside for six years.  He managed to get his sentence
reduced to two years by creating an atlas for the Emperor, at which point he
was given the freedom to choose the place he wanted to live.

So, for the last decade of his life, Shen Kuo moved to an estate he had
purchased at the height of his career.  Now, I went into all this detail about
Shen Kuo's life because it's really thanks to this exile in the final years of
his life that we are able to know so much about him.  To pass the time, he
wrote a long autobiographical book, which he called Brush Talks from a Dream
Brook.  The name came from the name of his estate, which was Dream Brook, and
he wrote that "Because I only had my writing brush and ink slab to converse
with, I call it my Brush Talks." The book is a series of essays, largely on the
things that Shen Kuo had worked on in his long career.  And we can see from
this work that he was a remarkable polymath.

In addition to his innovations in civil engineering and, of course, astronomy,
Shen Kuo made major advances in medicine, geology, meteorology, optics, and
mathematics, among other disciplines.  Relevant to his astronomical work he
made advances in spherical geometry, and like Archimedes he also came up with a
notation to specify extremely large numbers, in his case a number as large as
10 to the power of 172.  Like Xenophanes, Shen Kuo had observed sea shells high
up in mountains, and in one location where erosion had stripped away the side
of a mountain, he had even observed that the shells formed a band at roughly
the same level across the mountain.  From this he proposed that geographical
features must change gradually over time, and that in the distant past the
mountains must have been lower and the sea closer.

Well, in terms of his astronomy, one discovery of his in particular is
indicative of his exacting nature as an astronomer.  At the time, the pole star
was believed to be a star called Chi Hsing, or, the Summit Star, appropriately
enough.  When Shen Kuo was installed as the head of the Astronomical Bureau he
decided to check to see whether this star was indeed at the north celestial
pole.  To do this, he constructed a sighting tube and then oriented it towards
this star.  He then observed it over the course of the night and found that the
star moved out of the sight of the tube.  Based on this he concluded that this
star must not be the true pole star, because if the star really was at the
north celestial pole it would not move at all and would stay within the sight
of the tube all night long.  But he didn't stop there.  He then constructed a
slightly wider sighting tube and repeated the experiment.  Once again, the
supposed pole star drifted out of the line of sight of the tube.  So, he
repeated the process again, he constructed a new, slightly wider sighting tube
and did the experiment all over again.  Over the course of three months he
continued constructing slightly wider sighting tubes until, at last, he had
constructed a tube that was just wide enough that the pole star circled around
the edge of the field of view over the course of the night.  Based on the width
of this sighting tube, he concluded that the pole star was slightly more than
3 away from the true pole.  This episode is a good illustration of his
engineering skill in being able to design precision instruments for the job at
hand, his perseverance in carrying the experiment out, and the skepticism he
had to apply in the first place to even think to test the idea that the pole
star might not be exactly at the pole.

Another, somewhat less successful, program that Shen Kuo attempted was a
project to precisely measure the positions of the Moon and planets at dusk,
midnight, and dawn for five years.  As I mentioned a few episodes back, around
this time in Chinese history there was some, shall we say, talent issues in the
Astronomical Bureau.  Although the astronomers were supposed to record the
positions of the Moon and planets, in practice they would simply use a
simplified version of an old planetary model to predict where the planets
should be and mark that down rather than observe where the planets actually
were.  And at this point the model that they had been using was more than three
centuries old and had become extremely inaccurate.  Nevertheless, even as head
of the Astronomical Bureau, Shen Kuo was not able to get his underlings to make
real observations on a consistent basis.

Although Shen Kuo's greatest achievements were in areas that he could put his
engineering abilities to use, constructing instruments to make observations, he
was adept at the more theoretical side of astronomy as well.  In his day it was
still an open question whether the Moon and Sun were flat disks or spherical.
Proponents of the flat disk or fan theory argued that if the Moon and Sun were
spherical, they would crash into each other when they met on the sky as during
a solar eclipse.  For his part, Shen Kuo argued in favor of the spherical
theory.  He devised a demonstration where he painted one side of a ball a light
color and the other dark.  Then by rotating the ball through various angles you
could observe that the light portion would form a crescent, just as you see
with the phases of the moon.  Furthermore, he seems to have been the first one
to argue that the reason that we don't see an eclipse every month at the new
moon is because the orbits of the Sun and Moon were slightly inclined to each
other, so most months they did not overlap on the sky.

Well, this episode is late enough as it is, so I think that is all I will say
about Shen Kuo.  Next month will be the last episode in our series on the
astronomy of pre-modern China.  In the next episode we'll skip ahead to the
late Ming Dynasty and explore the arrival of the Jesuits to China, and how the
astronomy they brought with them helped them to get access deep inside the
Imperial Court.  I hope you'll join me then.  Until the next full moon, good
night and clear skies.

## Additional references

* Cullen, Christopher, Heavenly Numbers
* Needham, Science and Civilisation in China, Vol. 3
