---
categories: episode
date: '2024-04-25'
description: After Wang Mang deposed the Han Dynasty and instituted his new Xin Dynasty,
  he needed to promulgate a new calendar to mark the occasion. One of his court astronomers,
  Liu Xin, developed a new calendar that integrated the lunar and solar cycles with
  the planetary cycles and imbued it with numerological significance. We then talk
  about how Huan Tan, another astronomer of the era, would have gone about measuring
  the lunar mansions.
keywords:
- astronomy
- history
layout: episode
number: 41
title: Liu Xin's Theory of Everything
---

## Transcript

Good evening, and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon.  My
name is Joe Antognini.

Well, last month I tried to give a fuller picture of what a calendar reform
looked like in early Imperial China by chronicling the events of more than a
century that led up to the calendar reform of 104 BC.  In earlier episodes I
had tried to emphasize the importance of setting the calendar as a symbol of
Imperial authority.  This month we'll look at the subsequent calendar reform
that was instituted at the start of the short-lived Xin dynasty and introduced
the so-called Triple Concordance system of Liu Xin.  Then we'll turn to one of
the most important features of Chinese astronomy, the system of hsiu, or lunar
mansions.

As with the earlier calendar reform of 104 BC, the events that led up to the
calendar reform under the Xin Dynasty began with a period of political
dysfunction and fecklessness followed by a coup from a more capable leader.
But in this case, the timeline of events that led to the establishment of the
Triple Concordance system was accelerated relative to the earlier calendar
reform.  So in this episode we can begin our story just a few decades before
the main event rather than a century before as we did in the last episode.

Now, in the last episode we talked about the establishment of the Han dynasty,
the second imperial dynasty in China, and walked through the first few emperors
until we got to Emperor Wu, who established the new calendar for the Han
dynasty in 104 BC.  The early Han dynasty was a relatively successful period in
the history of China in part because the empire was fortunate enough to have a
string of emperors who were competent administrators.  This bout of good luck
lasted for another half century or so, and the middle of 1st century BC under
the reign of Emperor Xuan is generally considered to be the high water mark of
the Earlier Han Dynasty.  But all good things must come to an end, and after
the death of Emperor Xuan there was a sequence of progressively less and less
capable emperors.  The first few of these were not exactly malevolent in the
way that, say, an Emperor Nero or Caligula was in the Roman Empire.  They just
did not quite seem to be up to the task.  They were generally indecisive and,
more importantly, didn't have strong control over their bureaucracy.  So, over
the decades factionalism became more pronounced, and, even worse, corruption
started to get out of control.  Towards the end of the 1st century BC, the
Emperor Cheng died, yet another ineffectual emperor in what was by now a long
line of ineffectual emperors.  Emperor Cheng, however, died suddenly, and
relatively young, at the age of 44, and left no obvious heirs.  He had had two
sons with concubines, but his consort, Zhao Hede, had had both them and their
mothers killed with the Emperor's tacit consent, one by suffocation and the
other by starvation.

It's around this time that a man named Wang Mang enters the picture.  The Wang
clan had been on a meteoric ascent in just a generation or two.  Now, this
wasn't exactly a rags-to-riches story, the Wang clan had always been well off.
But Wang Mang's aunt was a woman named Wang Zhengjun and she had been born in
71 BC as the second daughter of the Minister of Justice.  This was a high
position in Chinese society, to be sure, but it was still some ways away from
the top.  The Minister of Justice was one of nine ministers, who in turn
reported to the Three Councillors of State, who, in turn, reported to the
Emperor himself.

Well, sometime around 55 BC, the consort of the Crown Prince Liu Shi died.
Inconsolable, the prince wanted to have nothing to do with the other concubines
in his harem.  After some time, to try to get him out of his funk, his father,
the Emperor Xuan, arranged for his son to meet a new set of women that he could
choose from.  Wang Zhengjun was one of the six women who went to meet the Crown
Prince.  Of these, the prince selected her to be his new consort, apparently
for no other reason than that she happened to be sitting closest to him.
Nevertheless, this happenstance arrangement was the breakthrough that the Wang
clan needed.  In time, Wang Zhengjun gave birth to a son, in fact, Liu Shi's
first son.  And a few years later the Emperor died and Liu Shi ascended to the
throne, taking the name Emperor Yuan, which meant that Wang Zhengjun went from
being the second daughter of the Minister of Justice to an Empress of China.

Well, with this turn of events the Wang clan had an inside track in court
politics.  According to the histories, most of the members of the family
parlayed their family position for high living.  But Wang Mang was different.
He didn't seem to be attracted to wealth and dressed in the refined, but modest
outfit of a Confucian scholar and used his considerable means to support a
gaggle of Confucian scholars around him.  Rather than living off on a grand
estate out in the country, he lived within the palace complex.

This unassuming demeanor was key to his growing stature.  He was quietly
competent in a time when each emperor was more incompetent than the next, and,
being in the heart of the Imperial machinery, he was in a position to exert
some influence.  With his lavish support of Confucian scholars, he brought this
powerful faction of the court lockstep behind him.

So, to get back to the original thread, when Emperor Cheng died in 7 BC and
left no obvious heirs, Wang Mang was in an exceptional position to influence
the selection of the next emperor, and more importantly, to influence the next
emperor himself if he was sufficiently pliant.  Now whether or not he had
conceived of any plans for ultimate power at this point isn't really clear, and
if he did, it didn't quite work out for him in the near term.  The next
emperor, Emperor Ai, ascended to the throne at the age of 20, but ended up
falling almost completely under the control of his step grandmother, the
Empress Dowager Wang.  Wang Mang clashed with the Empress Dowager on a few
occasions but was soon forced to resign from his position as commander of the
army.

Well, Emperor Ai had always been sickly.  What exactly his illness was is not
clear, but whatever it was, he died from it six years after ascending to the
throne.  This put his step grandmother, the Empress Dowager Wang in an awkward
position.  While Emperor Ai had technically been married, he was fairly open
about his homosexuality, and his real partner was a minor official named Dong
Xian.  Later chroniclers described their relationship as the "passion of the
cut sleeve," in reference to a story in which the two had fallen asleep in each
others arms.  Upon waking and finding the sleeve to his Imperial robe still
trapped under Dong Xian, the Emperor cut his own sleeve off rather than wake
his lover.  Well, over the six years of his rule, Emperor Ai lavished Dong Xian
with ever higher offices, and by the time of Emperor Ai's death, Dong Xian had
become one of the most powerful men in the Chinese court and a rival to the
Empress Dowager.  In fact, on his deathbed Emperor Ai had pronounced Dong Xian
to be his successor.  So the Empress Dowager Wang put aside her differences
with Wang Mang and joined forces with him to box out Dong Xian from having any
role in the subsequent reign.  Together, they planted an eight-year-old boy
named Liu Jizi on the throne, where he adopted the name Emperor Ping.  Being
too young to rule in his own right, the Empress Dowager appointed Wang Mang to
be regent.  To further consolidate his grip on power Wang Mang then arranged
for his daughter to be married to the emperor.

This was a successful strategy for a few years, but once the emperor became a
teenager, Wang Mang began to worry that the boy would get thoughts of his own.
To make matters worse, an awkward episode had occurred a few years earlier.
Wang Mang's son, along with several of the emperor's uncles, had attempted a
coup to wrest power away from the increasingly dominant Wang Mang.  They had
been discovered and Wang Mang had them all put to death, including his own son.
But as Emperor Ping got older, Wang Mang worried that he might not be too happy
about the fact that Wang Mang had killed all of his uncles.  So he nipped this
problem in the bud by poisoning the Emperor.  At this point Wang Mang had
become so powerful that he essentially had free reign in choosing the next
emperor.  The last few emperors had all died so young that they had no heirs
and so the closest candidates for succession were all quite distant in the
imperial line.  Wang Mang settled on Ruzi Ying, who, conveniently enough, was
only one year old, and so wouldn't cause any trouble for quite some time.

At this stage, Wang Mang's long game of bringing the court scholars and
officials onto his side began to pay off.  Over the next three years a series
of auspicious omens started to trickle in, and a chorus of officials in court
began to propose, first obliquely, and later loudly, that he assume the title
of emperor.  Finally, in 9 AD, Wang Mang held a formal ceremony, in which he
and the four-year-old Emperor stood before the Imperial Court together.  Wang
Mang held the child's hand and performatively wept before the child "for a long
time."  He then explained to the child before the whole court that the Han
Dynasty had been blessed by the Mandate of Heaven for many years, but that the
great Han Dynasty had come to an end.  Now the Mandate of Heaven had fallen to
him.  According to the Han Shu, he said

> Oh Emperor Ying!  Formerly August Heaven supported your Great Ancestor [Liu
> Bang, the founder of the Han], so his descendants succeeded for twelve
> generations, and possessed the state for two hundred and ten years, [but now]
> the sequence of reckonings rests on my person.

This last phrase, the "sequence of reckonings," is "li shu," and in essence
referred to the authority to set the calendar.  Shortly after taking the
throne, Wang Mang created seven high ministers and associated each one with one
of the planets, with the exception of Saturn, instead substituting in the Big
Dipper.  For example:

> Jupiter has charge of conscientiousness; [under its patronage] the Grand
> Master of the Eastern Peak sees to it that timely rain comes about, and by
> its cerulean brilliance he promotes peace, examining the shadow using a
> gnomon.

Each of these ministers was not only associated with a planet, but also an
astronomical measurement.  In this case it was measuring the shadow from a
gnomon.  The minister associated with Mercury was tasked with the keeping of
the water clocks and the minister associated with the Sun was associated with
the compass --- the kind you draw circles with, not the kind you find north
with.

Well, having at long last formalized his de facto rule, Wang Mang took much
less time adopting the ritualistic symbols of a new dynasty than the Han
dynasty had two centuries before.  Now, you may recall from the last episode
and the one before that, that an important feature of Chinese semiotics was the
"wuxing" system in which the five fundamental elements of earth, metal, wood,
water, and fire existed in various relationships to each other.  Each dynasty
had been associated with an element.  Now, traditionally, the elements
associated with subsequent dynasties had been assigned to the so-called
destructive or conquest cycle.  So, since the Zhou dynasty had been associated
with fire, the following dynasty, the Qin dynasty, should be associated with
water, since water extinguishes fire.  This seems natural.  But in the century
leading up to this new Xin dynasty, a new line of thought started to become
more popular among the scholars.  As you may have intuited by this point,
particularly among Confucian factions, continuity with the past was highly
prized.  Even when a rebel king or an ambitious official effectively seized
absolute power for himself, he was very slow to formally adopt the title of
Emperor and would do so only after years of laying the appropriate groundwork
and at the urging of the court.  In the case of the Han dynasty the first Han
Emperor had to be persuaded into the role and it took about a century for the
Han Emperors to formally declare themselves to be a new dynasty.  With the Xin
dynasty we just saw how the new Emperor stood before the court with the former
emperor to emphasize this continuity with the past.  Given this attitude,
scholars of the time wondered whether the destructive or conquest cycle of the
wuxing was really appropriate to describe dynastic successions.  After all it
has connotations of violence, conquest, and, well destruction.  But wasn't it
really more appropriate that these dynastic successions be associated with the
more peaceful generating cycle instead?  There was a change, yes, from one
dynasty to the next, but each dynasty grew out of the one that came before,
rather than destroying it and replacing it with something new.

So, over the course of the Han dynasty, some time after the calendar reform,
the idea started to become popular that the true element associated with the
Han dynasty was not Earth, as had been previously assumed, but Fire.  Scholars
went all the way back to Shang dynasty, which had been associated with
the element of metal.  But in the generating cycle, metal is followed by water,
since water condenses onto metal.  The Zhou dynasty was thus associated with
water.  Then the Qin dynasty was associated with wood, since water nourishes
wood.  And thus the Han dynasty was associated with fire, since wood feeds
fire.  This meant that when Wang Mang established his new Xin dynasty, it was
associated with Earth, since fire produces ash.

Well if you can remember all the way back to the beginning of this episode, my
point in talking about all this was to talk about the system that Liu Xin
implemented.  Liu Xin was an esteemed scholar and astronomer and was a friend
and staunch supporter of Wang Mang. Liu Xin had been among those who laid the
political and intellectual groundwork for Wang Mang to take the imperial title.
When Wang Mang finally established his new dynasty, Liu Xin was intimately
involved in setting the new calendar.

Now, if you remember from the last episode, in the calendar reform of 104 BC,
the idea had been to set as the starting point of the new calendar the winter
solstice of 105 BC because this day happened to not only be the winter
solstice, but it was also the first day of the month, or in other words, a new
moon, and on top of that, it was the first day of the sexagenary cycle.  And
this coincidence of events only occurred every 4617 years.  So much of the work
in developing the calendar in this older reform in 105 BC was in setting an
alignment between the yearly cycle of solstices with the monthly cycle of lunar
phases along with the 60 day sexagenary cycle.

For this latest calendar reform to inaugurate the new Xin dynasty, Liu Xin's
main innovation was to introduce the motions of the planets into the cycles of
the calendar.  Now at this point in the history of astronomy in China the
planets had been, of course, observed and recorded for some time, but their
motions hadn't been integrated into the calendar at all.  Based on the past
records, Liu Xin determined the periods of motion of each of the planets and
then multiplied them all together to get the time it took for all five planets
to end up in exactly the same spot --- 138,240 years.  Then, multiplying by the
length of the lunar cycle, the solar cycle, and the sexagenary cycle, he ended
up with the time it took the entire cosmos to return to its origin ---
23,639,040 years.  This was the so-called triple concordance.

Now, I mentioned this length of time two episodes back, but one of the things
that is maybe a little unusual for the modern mind to understand about it was
that it was not purely empirical.  Today, when we go and measure the periods of
the planets, we do so under the implicit assumption that they could be more or
less anything.  We just have to go out and measure them to see what they really
are.  But for Liu Xin and other astronomers in pre-modern China it was not
generally believed that astronomical periods could be just anything.  It was
assumed that the numbers associated with the heavens were suffused with
numerological meaning.  So this meant that when Liu Xin was setting out this
calendar he had a delicate dance that he needed to do.  The various numbers
that he defined in his calendar which represented things like the periods of
the planets, the length of the year, and so forth, had to have numerological
significance, so he couldn't just do some sort of best-fit analysis on the data
he had.  At the same time, he couldn't simply make up the numbers according to
purely numerological methods.  The periods had to be in more or less plausible
agreement with the data he had.  Now, fortunately for Liu Xin, the data,
particularly for the planetary motions, was noisy enough that there was a
fairly wide range of numbers he could pick and still be in decent agreement
with past observations.  Generally the planets were recorded on their first
appearance, but the date of the first appearance was calculated for when the
planet was 15° away from the Sun, which is usually a few days after the planet
is actually visible in the sky.  For the astronomers of this period, a
prediction was seen to be successful as long as the planet appeared before it
was predicted to.  And, even setting aside any observational errors, the length
of the synodic periods of the planets is intrinsically variable due to the
eccentricity of the Earth's orbit.

As an example of how this interplay of observation and numerology worked, we
can look at the case of Jupiter.  The basic idea was that the synodic period of
each planet was, in turn, given as a multiple of the length of the year, and
this multiple was given as a fraction, with a whole number in the numerator and
denominator.  The numerator, called the year number, had particular
numerological significance and the denominator, called the appearance number,
was less important numerologically.  So the strategy was to use numerology to
come up with the numerator and then set the denominator so that the period
agreed with the observed data.  In the case of Jupiter, the year number was
1,728.  To arrive at this number, Liu Xin took the element that corresponded to
Jupiter, which was wood, as well as the following element in the destructive
cycle --- metal, since metal chops wood.  Each of these elements was associated
with a number, 3 for wood and 4 for metal.  Multiply these together and you get
twelve.  Then you multiply by 144, called the Chthonic reckoning, which has its
origin in the I Ching.  This gives you 1,728.  Divide by the appearance number
of 1583 and multiply by the length of the year, and you get 398.7 days for the
synodic period of Jupiter, which is just five hours off from its true value of
398.9 days.

The numerological process to arrive at this number for Jupiter is fairly
straightforward, but other parameters in the calendar were trickier to derive.
The numerology for the lunation factor, in particular is quite involved, but in
the end Liu Xin got a lunar period which was just 24 seconds off from the
modern day value.  And these techniques also extended to the prediction of
lunar eclipses.  This calendar of Liu Xin has been described as a kind of
"theory of everything" from the early Imperial period.  It united all the
periodic phenomena observed in the heavens with numerological underpinnings.

One of the unique things that Liu Xin then did with his calendar is he went
back and used it to predict the state of the heavens at different points in the
past.  He goes back all the way to some of the earliest events recorded in
Chinese history.  The first of these was the fall of the Xia Dynasty after it
was conquered by the Shang.  Liu Xin was able to determine that in 1751 BC
Jupiter was in an auspicious position for the Shang Dynasty.  Now this was not
an especially rigorous test since as far as we can tell, he simply found a date
that looked good for the Shang Dynasty without any independent evidence that
1751 BC was when the Xia Dynasty fell, and in any case it doesn't seem likely
from the historical record that the Xia Dynasty actually existed in the first
place.  He was also able to reconstruct the sky in 1122 BC, the traditional
date of the fall of the Shang dynasty to the Zhou dynasty, and found the
positions of Jupiter, the Moon, the Sun, and Mercury.  Now, from a modern
perspective the Zhou Dynasty is now known to have conquered the Shang dynasty
about a century after Liu Xin thought, but nevertheless this was the first time
in Chinese history that an astronomer had taken a model of the motions of the
heavens and then rewound it to go back in time and see what the sky looked like
during a momentous event in the past.

Liu Xin's backdating techniques got more stringent as he approached his present
day.  By the Warring States Period we now start to see records which were
filled with astronomical observations, and, being believed to have been
authored or edited by Confucius himself, were highly regarded, and so were
believed to be quite accurate.  Now, fortunately for Liu Xin, over shorter time
periods, any errors in his system would have had less time to build up, and at
any rate, some of these observations were the very same ones he used to derive
his parameters, so generally speaking he was able to reproduce various
observations at different points in Chinese history.  There are a couple of
places where modern historians of astronomy have noted that his system
disagreed with the past observations, particularly when it came to eclipses.
But if he noticed these irregularities, Liu Xin said nothing about them, he
simply omitted them from his descriptions.

Well, in the last episode, before I got into all the details, political and
astronomical, around the development of these various calendar reforms, my
reason for bringing them up was to talk about one area of Chinese astronomy
that we haven't explored yet, but which I've referenced on a few occasions ---
the hsiu, or the lunar mansions.

At the most basic level, the lunar mansions were a way of identifying the
positions of stars and planets in the heavens.  In this way they played a
similar role that the zodiac did in Greek astronomy.  Just as Ptolemy recorded
the positions of stars and planets with respect to the signs of the zodiac,
Chinese astronomers recorded positions with respect to the 28 lunar mansions.

Now, the system of lunar mansions seems to be quite old in Chinese astronomy.
The earliest artifacts that reference the lunar mansions are oracle bones which
date to the 14th century BC.  But there is circumstantial evidence that the
system may be even a millennium older than that.  As I'll talk about in more
detail in a bit, the system of lunar mansions was fundamentally an equatorial
system --- the 28 lunar mansions all spanned roughly even widths around the
celestial equator.  Each mansion was represented by a particular star or
asterism.  If we look at where these stars are on the sky, though, they aren't
exactly on the celestial equator.  But if we go back to 2400 BC, due to the
precession of the equinoxes, we find that many of the representative stars for
the lunar mansions fall much closer to where the celestial equator was at the
time.  So it's possible that the system may have had its origin back that far.

To get more details about the system of lunar mansions we have to go farther
ahead of that in history, though.  The oldest artifact with the complete system
of all 28 lunar mansions is a box that was buried in a tomb in 433 BC, but this
artifact simply lists their names.  The first really detailed record we have of
the lunar mansions was written in a book called the Huai Nan Zi in 139 BC.
Each lunar mansion was given a name, a star or asterism to identify it, and its
width.  These widths were given in units of "du," which is the average distance
that the Sun travels on the sky in one day.  The widths of all of the lunar
mansions are given as whole numbers of du, except for the seventh, the
"winnower," which has a width of 11 ¼ du.  So, if you add the widths of all the
du up, you get 365 ¼, the number of days in the year, just as you would expect.

So, how were the widths of the various lunar mansions determined in the first
place?  The Huai Nan Zi doesn't say, but if we move forward another century and
a half or so we get a more detailed account by an astronomer named Huan Tan.
Huan Tan was active during the tail end of the Earlier Han Dynasty and then the
Xin Dynasty.  He seems to have had some political acumen, or at least an
instinct to keep himself out of trouble, because he managed to maintain his
position in the court during the transition from the Earlier Han Dynasty to the
Xin Dynasty, and then back to the Han Dynasty as it reasserted itself again in
25 AD.  It perhaps helped that although he held respectable positions, he also
wasn't exactly the most powerful person around.  His father had been the
Director of Music and the highest position he himself ever attained was that of
"lang," which is usually translated as Court Scholar or Gentleman.  In his own
day he was best known for his musical talents.  Apparently the greatest
controversy he stirred in his career was the style of music he played on the
lute which was described as "licentious."  But, among his various scholarly
activities it seems that at one point in his career he was in charge of running
the clepsydras, or water clocks.  He wrote:

> Formerly, when I served as a Court Scholar, I was in charge of the clepsydra.
> If [conditions varied between] dry and humid, cold or warm, then there were
> different [measurements].  So in order to have timings for dusk and dawn,
> daylight or nighttime, I checked against the solar shadow in the daytime, and
> in the night portion [of the clepsydra run] I checked against the stellar
> lodges.  Thus I got the correct [measurement].

Evidently Huan Tan took his job seriously.  As it happens, we have a pretty
good idea of what one of Huan Tan's water clocks may have looked like.  In 1977
a clepsydra was unearthed in the Inner Mongolia region.  This is a bit far
flung from the capital at Chang'an which suggests that precision measuring
equipment was widely dispersed across the empire, and that presumably
astronomical observations took place all over.  Conveniently, the clepsydra was
inscribed with details about its manufacture.  It says that it is a bronze
clepsydra made in Qianzhang.  It says that it weighs 32 "jin," and that it was
manufactured in the fourth month of the second year of the Heping period, which
corresponds to the year 27 BC, so just a few decades before Huan Tan was
working.  Incidentally, these kinds of inscriptions are common on official
equipment manufactured in Imperial China and indicated that the bureaucracy
kept careful track of its inventory.

Well, this particular clepsydra was not terribly large.  It had a diameter of
about 20 cm and stood about half a meter tall.  It had a spout at the bottom
for the water to flow out.  At the top there was a kind of rack.  A vertical
rod could be attached to the rack and it would have a floatation device at its
end.  The rod would have gradations on it, and based on its position relative
to the horizontal bars of the rack the user could read off the water level.

Now, one of the disadvantages of a simple outflow clepsydra like the one found
in Inner Mongolia is that it does not produce a constant rate of flow.  When
the vessel is full, the water pressure is higher and the water streams out more
rapidly, so the water level falls more quickly.  But towards the end of the
run, once the water level is low, the water just trickles out, and the water
level falls more slowly.  In later Chinese history, sometime after the Han
Dynasty, more sophisticated kinds of water clocks were devised similar to the
ones we talked about in Egypt back in Episode 32.  These would have multiple
stages where one tank would continually supply water to the main chamber with
an overflow gutter around it.  This would keep the main chamber continually
topped up so that the water pressure at the bottom of the main chamber was
always constant and the outflow rate was always the same.  But in Huan Tan's
time these more sophisticated clepsydras had yet to be invented and he just had
a simple outflow clepsydra to work with.  But given the records we have, Huan
Tan was clearly a careful observer, he was accounting for things like changes
in humidity and temperature when making his observations, so surely he would
have been aware that the outflow rate slowed down from the beginning of the run
to the end, since that's pretty much the most basic thing you can observe about
it.  Although we don't know exactly how he and other astronomers of the period
dealt with this problem there are two things he could have done, depending on
the size of his water clock.  Now, unfortunately we also don't know how large a
water clock the imperial astronomers used.  The clepsydra specimen we have is
one that was discovered out in the boonies rather than one in the capital, so
it's possible that the official one in the capital was quite a bit larger.  If
it was quite large, so that a full run would take approximately a day, the
astronomers probably would have had some assistants manually top off the
clepsydra once the water level had dropped a certain level.  This would have
kept the outflow rate approximately constant.  If the official clepsydra was
smaller, more of the size of the one discovered in Inner Mongolia, then it may
have taken roughly only 10 to 20 minutes to empty.  In this case, the change in
rate from beginning to end wouldn't have been as much of a factor since the
astronomers would be doing dozens of runs one after the other during a 24 hour
period.  The basic unit of time that they would be measuring would simply be
time it took the vessel to empty, and they could use the graduated rod to get
the fraction of the last run.  The second option seems somewhat more likely
since the basic unit of time in the era was the "ke," and there were 100 ke in
a day, which works out to 14 minutes and 24 seconds.  Though, as an aside, one
of the changes that was introduced during Wang Mang's calendar reform when he
officially established the Xia Dynasty was that he changed the value of the ke
so that there were 120 ke in a day instead of 100 ke.  At any rate, in either
case both techniques relied on having diligent operators immediately fill the
water clock back up again when it was time to do so in order to keep accurate
time.

Okay, so that's a little bit about how the astronomers of the period used to
measure time, but what specifically were they measuring and how did this help
them determine the lunar mansions?  Now as I mentioned earlier, one of the
unique things about the lunar mansions is that it was an equatorial system
rather than an ecliptic system.  In the West, in Babylonian and Greek
astronomy, and later on in European astronomy, the positions of the planets
were measured using the zodiac, and the zodiac was 12 equal divisions of the
ecliptic.  Now, in many ways this is a natural system for measuring the
positions of the Sun, Moon, and planets, because their paths all follow the
ecliptic, so you just have to measure their positions against the reference
stars along the ecliptic.  But if you're doing precision measurements, in
particular, using some kind of clock, an equatorial system tends to work
better.  In modern astronomy we use the system of right ascension and
declination.  You can imagine this as being basically like the system of
latitude and longitude but projected out onto the celestial sphere.  So the
north celestial pole, near Polaris, has a declination of 90 degrees, just as
the north pole on the Earth has a latitude of 90 degrees, just as the North
Pole on the Earth has a latitude of 90°.  And the celestial equator has a
declination of zero degrees just as the Earth's equator has a latitude of zero
degrees.  Then you have right ascension in a similar way as you have longitude,
except instead of starting at Greenwich as you do for longitude, right
ascension starts at the vernal equinox, where the celestial equator and the
ecliptic meet.

Well, each star in the sky has a fixed right ascension and declination, just as
each point on the Earth has a fixed latitude and longitude.  Now, imagine you
are standing out in a field on a clear night, facing south.  Over the course of
the night, you'll see stars rising in the east to your left, climb higher in
the sky moving rightward, reach their highest point as they transit the
meridian in front of you, and then start to get lower in the sky, and finally
set in the west to your right.  If you just watch the meridian, the line going
from south, to the zenith overhead, to north, and you track the right
ascensions of the stars that are transiting, you'll see that they increase in
right ascension over the course of the night.  In fact, traditionally, right
ascension is not measured in degrees like longitude is, but in terms of time.
The full circle of the celestial equator has 24 hours of right ascension.  The
right ascension of the stars crossing the meridian then increases at
approximately one second per second.  Very convenient.

Well, the system of lunar mansions was not quite as tidy as the modern system
of right ascension and declination, but it was similar in spirit.  The system
of lunar mansions effectively did not have declination, this celestial
latitude, but it was more or less equivalent to the system of right ascension.
Each of the 28 lunar mansions were each defined by a reference star or
asterism.  Now, again, one of the rather unique features of the system of lunar
mansions is that it does seem to have been quite deliberately designed to
measure right ascension well.  You might imagine that the astronomers who
developed it would have picked the brightest, most prominent stars as their
reference points.  But actually most of the reference stars in the system are
not especially notable or bright.  Only two of the reference stars are of 2nd
magnitude, which is about how bright Polaris is.  Four of them are of 5th
magnitude, which is quite faint, and one is even of 6th magnitude, which is
barely visible to the naked eye.  So, these stars were chosen as reference
points not because they were particularly bright or easy to observe, but
because they fell at roughly even intervals in right ascension around the sky.

Okay, well the documents on the system of lunar mansions that start to show up
in the 2nd and 1st century BC record the width of each lunar mansion.  So how
was this measured?  The measurement took place in three parts.  The first part
was to find the direction of south.  This part was relatively straightforward.
The precise technique the astronomers of ancient China used was not recorded,
but it involved using a gnomon.  So, probably what they did was one of two
things.  The simpler thing you could do was to just trace out the end of the
gnomon's shadow over the course of a day.  Then you just draw a line from the
gnomon to the point where the shadow comes closest to the gnomon.  That line
will be north-south.  A somewhat more sophisticated technique that will be a
little more accurate is to find two points on this line of equal distance to
the gnomon, one on the western side and one on the eastern side.  Then you draw
a line between these two points and bisect it.  The line from the middle point
to the gnomon is also north-south.

Well, either way, once you've done something like this, you now have your
gnomon, and you have a line that goes north-south.  For the second part of your
measurement, you would now introduce the clepsydra and calibrate it against the
sky.  To do this, you would stand on this line north of the gnomon around noon.
At the moment that the Sun transited the meridian, you would set your water
clock going.  You'd let it run for a full day, refilling it if necessary.  Then
the next day you'd wait until noon and at the exact moment that the Sun
transited the meridian again, you'd stop your water clock.  So you'd now have
some volume of water that you've measured from your water clock and you know
that this volume of water corresponds to exactly 24 hours.  And with that
you've calibrated your water clock.

For the last part of the measurement, you would now be able to do the actual
measurements of the lunar mansions.  All you'd have to do is wait for a
reference star to cross the meridian and then set your water clock going.
After some period of time, a little less than an hour or so, the reference star
of the next lunar mansion would transit.  The amount of time you measured
between these two transits divided by 24 hours would be the width of the lunar
mansion in terms of a fraction of a circle.  From there, you'd just have to
multiply by 365 ¼ to convert it to a standard unit like the "du."

Now a feature of calendars of the time is that they would also report which
lunar mansions were "centered" at dusk and dawn, as well as which lunar mansion
the Sun was in at various points of the year.  Figuring out which lunar mansion
is centered at dusk and dawn was fairly straightforward.  At dusk you would
just wait until the sky was dark enough that you could see the stars and
observe which lunar mansion fell across the meridian at that time.  And then
you would do something similar at dawn.  But how did astronomers of the time
figure out which lunar mansion the Sun was in at different times of the year?
When the Sun is up it's day, so you can't see any of the stars.  It seems that
what they did was they would observe which lunar mansion was transiting at
midnight as well as at dusk and dawn.  If you have a water clock going and you
know when dusk and dawn are, it is not too hard to figure out when midnight
was.  Then they assumed that the Sun would be in that position in six month's
time.  So, if you collect these measurements over the course of the year, you
can determine which lunar mansion the Sun is in at any time even though you
can't actually observe it directly.

Well, with these techniques the lunar mansions could be measured relatively
precisely.  And because the lunar mansions were the foundation of many
astronomical measurements for millennia, this allowed Chinese astronomers to
detect one of the most subtle changes in the heavens, the precession of the
equinoxes.  I mentioned earlier how it's plausible that when the system was
first developed the reference stars were all quite close to where the celestial
equator was at the time.  However, due to the precession of the equinoxes, the
location of the celestial equator very slowly wobbles on the sky.  This meant
that stars that were once close to the celestial equator over the centuries
became farther and farther from the equator.  And because they now started to
change their positions in declination, that meant that their positions in right
ascension were also changing.  So even if the reference stars started out as
being equally spaced in right ascension, due to the precession of the equinoxes
they didn't stay that way over the centuries.  So every few centuries when the
astronomers went to measure the widths of the lunar mansions, they would find
that it did not quite agree with the measurements of astronomers in the past.
In fact, by the 13th century, precession had changed the position of the
celestial equator so much that in one case one of the stars that had
traditionally been listed after another started to transit before, so the order
of the mansions got switched.  To deal with this, from time to time astronomers
would make new measurements of the widths of the lunar mansions, and more
infrequently, when things really got bad, they would drop one of the reference
stars and replace it with one that was better suited.

And it seems to be thanks to the precision of this system that an astronomer
named Yu Xi was able to discover the precession of the equinoxes in the 4th
century AD.  He noted that the position of the winter solstice seemed to move
by one degree every 50 years, which is not too far off from the correct value
of one degree every 72 years.  It's also possible that the precision of Chinese
astronomical measurements, along with the many centuries that they were
conducted over, allowed them to detect another phenomenon that took until the
18th century to definitively discover, that of proper motion.  In basic
spherical astronomy we tend to use an idealized model of the heavens where the
stars are imagined to be fixed to a great sphere that rotates around us.  This
model works quite well for many observations, but today, modern astronomy tells
us that the stars are not points of light fixed to an enormous sphere, but are
distant objects freely floating in space.  As such, they are constantly moving
relative to each other and to us, but because the distances are so large, we on
the Earth don't perceive these motions over a human lifespan.  But over the
centuries these motions build up and, at least for the closer stars, can
eventually become quite noticeable.  Over the millennia, the shapes of the
constellations themselves change and after long enough times, they will become
unrecognizable.  In the 9th century AD, an astronomer named Yi Xing observed
that a group of stars in Taurus was on the ecliptic.  But in the past records,
this group of stars was noted as being 4° south of the ecliptic.  Now, your
position relative to the celestial equator can change over time due to the
precession of the equinoxes, but your position relative to the ecliptic cannot.
This change in position was in fact due to the proper motion of this group of
stars.

Well, before leaving the subject of the hsiu I should say at least a few more
words about its origin.  I've been using the common term "lunar mansion" to
describe this system, but it is admittedly a bit of an odd translation since
you may have noticed that I didn't mention the moon at all when talking about
the lunar mansions.  That said, its origins are undoubtedly lunar.  The moon
advances by roughly one lunar mansion every night.  Now, the fact that there
were 28 lunar mansions in this system needs a bit of explaining because if the
idea was that the moon would advance by exactly one mansion per night, there
really should be 27 since the sidereal period of the moon is 27.3 days.  But
astronomers were also interested in the synodic period of the moon, the time
from new moon to new moon, and this is 29 and a half days.  So it's possible
that they settled upon 28 lunar mansions as a kind of average between these two
lunar numbers.  But this is, at least to me, a somewhat unsatisfying
explanation.

Now you may recall from Episode 35 that there was a similar system in India
called the nakshatras.  The relationship between the Indian system and the
Chinese system has engendered no small amount of debate, much of which has
produced more heat than light.  Partisans of either side have argued that their
own system is the older of the two and that it later influenced the other.
What is clear is that the two systems are not totally independent.  Nine out of
the twenty-eight reference stars are identical, which is fairly remarkable
since as I mentioned earlier, many of these reference stars are otherwise not
especially notable.  Eleven of the 28 are reference stars are very close to
each other in the two systems, which, again, is fairly remarkable since the
stars could in principle be chosen quite far from the equator.  So even if they
were constrained to be nearby in right ascension, there was no reason for them
to be nearby in declination as well.  Only eight of the 28 references stars are
truly distinct between the two systems, and of these, two are very bright
stars, Vega and Altair, and these were very likely part of the Chinese system
in its infancy.  But all this tells us is that the two systems were not
independent of each other, not which one came first.  The first really detailed
descriptions of the systems appear in the literary record at about the same
time in both China and India.  But both locations also have more oblique
references or evidence that indicate that the system was a lot older in both
places, which makes it very hard to adjudicate which of the two had precedence.
It's also possible that some version of the two systems initially developed
independently, but that the two systems converged as contacts between India and
China increased.  So, given the contentiousness of the topic I will not wade
into this debate and pollute it with my own ill-informed opinions.

Well, I think I will leave it here for this month.  I hope you are as relieved
as I am that I have at long last gotten around to talking about the system of
lunar mansions.  Next month we'll talk about a couple of the other great
astronomers in Chinese history, Zhang Heng, who worked in the later Han
Dynasty, and Shen Kuo, who worked during the Song Dynasty.  I hope you'll join
me then.  Until the next full moon, good night and clear skies.

## Additional references

* Cullen, Christopher, Heavenly Numbers
* Needham, Science and Civilisation in China, Vol. 3
