---
categories: episode
date: '2024-03-29'
description: We learn about the political events and omens that led to the calendar
  reform of 104 BC.
keywords:
- astronomy
- history
layout: episode
number: 40
title: Emperor Wu's Woo
---

## Transcript

Good evening, and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon.  My
name is Joe Antognini.

Well, last month we looked at the famous "guest stars" in Chinese astronomy,
along with the place of eclipses and the planets.  As with the month before
that, I promised at the end that we would wrap up our tour of Chinese astronomy
in the following episode by skipping ahead to the 17th century with the arrival
of Jesuit astronomers in China.  But I am afraid that I have deceived the loyal
listeners of this podcast on yet another occasion.  The history of Chinese
astronomy has turned out to be such a bounty of delights that I simply have to
dwell on the topic a little while longer.  So the Jesuits will have to wait
until another month.

Now, I also mentioned at the end of the last episode that I would talk about
the hsiu, or lunar mansions, and unfortunately I lied on that front as well.  I
wanted to lead into the hsiu rather gradually, and it turned out as I was
writing the episode that I led into the hsiu a bit too gradually and never
quite got to them by the end.  So that, too, will have to wait for the next
episode.  Instead, we'll start with some backstory before we get to the hsiu
and talk about an event in the history of Chinese astronomy that I mentioned
only in passing two episodes back --- the calendar reform of 104 BC.

Now, I've mentioned in previous episodes the historical importance of setting
the calendar in Chinese political society.  Setting the calendar was one of the
paradigmatic activities of the Emperor --- it was simply one of the things that
defined him as Emperor --- he was the one who regulated time.  And the Emperor
was the link between Heaven and Earth.  The emperor sat at the center of the
Earth, right at its pivot point, about which the Heavens turned.  When he acted
in harmony with Heaven, all was right in the world --- the harvests were
bountiful, the weather was pleasant, the omens were auspicious, and the
calendar marked the time properly.  When the Emperor acted rashly, imposed
unjust laws, and punished people unfairly, there was disharmony with Heaven,
and this manifested itself in famine, plague, storms, ominous omens, and the
calendar would drift from the seasons.  A court official named Cai Yong, who
must have had an uncommon courage, warned the Emperor in 178 AD that his
behavior needed to change, writing:

> Since Your Majesty ascended the throne, there has been a succession of
> natural calamities, with several years being marked by solar eclipses and
> earthquakes....  You should rectify matters concerning your sacred person,
> giving careful thought to self-restraint --- that will save the situation.

Now, for what it is worth, the surrounding context shows that Cai Yong was not
exactly criticizing the Emperor's conduct per se, but rather the conduct of the
eunuchs in the court, who were opposed to Cai Yong's program of restoring the
ancient rituals.  But nevertheless, his recommendation that the Emperor change
his position with respect to the eunuchs only hardened their opposition to him,
and he soon found himself in the position of needing to flee the court and
spent the next 12 years in a self-imposed exile in the south of the country.

At any rate, I mentioned this two episodes back, but it is worth repeating: the
authority of the emperor setting the calendar in Chinese society was analogous
to the authority of the emperor to mint coins with his image on it in Western
society.  And if the calendar drifted, people would notice, and this was a bad
signal of the Emperor's competence.  It might be an early sign that the Mandate
of Heaven was slipping away from him.  The Zuo Zhuan mentions what might happen
if the intercalations were done incorrectly:

> In the 12th month during winter there were grasshoppers.  Jisun asked
> Confucius about this unseasonable event.  Confucius said, 'I have heard that
> insects are all in hibernation after Antares has heliacally set.  But Antares
> is still sinking in the west.  This is a mistake by those in charge of the
> calendar.'

So, the calendar was clearly important in Chinese society, more so than in
perhaps any other society, which is really saying something.  But what
precisely did the calendar regulate?  Now, as with most other societies the
calendar regulated the things that you would expect it to --- when to plant,
when to harvest, when certain festivals were to be celebrated and so on.  But
one of the interesting things about the Chinese archaeological record is that
we actually have some quite detailed descriptions of what was to happen at
various points throughout the year, and one of the surprising things about
these descriptions is just how much the activities of the peasants were
micromanaged by the calendar.  There is a document from 5 AD that was displayed
in a public place, visible to all, though presumably it was only meant for the
local officials since the peasants could not read.  The document was a decree
from the Imperial Court reminding the local officials as to how they were to
direct the activities of the local population throughout the year.

Some of the directives detailed in this document were meant for the officials
alone.  One, for instance, tells them to end the year with a set of rituals:

> In the last month of winter, command the responsible officials to carry out
> the great exorcism and the directional sacrifice and make the clay ox to send
> off the cold wind.

But many of these directives were intended to govern the activities of the
people themselves.  For instance, it was common for the local officials to
press gang the locals into build or repair the town's infrastructure.  But the
decree instructs the officials, "In the first month of spring, do not assemble
large groups."  So in the first month of spring, these large-scale repairs or
construction projects would not be performed, presumably to give the peasants
enough time to plant their crops.  Another line says "In the third month of
spring, do not shoot birds with pellets, spread nets, or use other techniques
to capture them."  Later, "In the second month of autumn, exhort the people to
plant wheat.  Do not permit them to miss the proper season; if they miss the
proper season, carry out the punishment without a doubt."  One of the more
remarkable directives governs behavior during the equinoxes:
  
> When day and night are equal, then thunder will make its sound and start the
> lightning.  Three days before the thunder, ring the bell to command the
> people, saying: When there is thunder, do not become pregnant.  Those who do
> not control their comportment will give birth to imperfect children and are
> sure to suffer calamity.

So the calendar not only regulated when people planted crops and hunted game,
but it also instructed them as to when it was permissible or not to have sex.

Another feature of the calendar that governed behavior were the Fan Zhi days.
These were days that the calendar spirit "shen sha" was active and were
considered to be of ill portent.  Consequently, in the early imperial era
officials would often take these days off, though this practice seems to have
been curtailed by the Emperor Ming in the middle of the first century AD.  The
author Wang Fu wrote a century later about an occasion on which the Emperor
Ming asked his officials why the common people had presented no petitions to
him at his usual dawn audience.  The officials responded that it was because it
was a Fan Zhi day, so the Bureau of Complaints had been closed.  The Emperor
chastised them and said that the people had abandoned their farm work and
traveled from afar to the capital to present their petitions to him.  When the
officials then arbitrarily stop their work, this amounts to nothing less than
stealing a day from the people.  He then decreed that the Bureau of Complaints
should receive petitions even on Fan Zhi days.

From what we can tell, these structures were not imposed on an entirely
unwilling people.  During the early Imperial period a new genre of written work
appears called the "rishu," which is generally translated as "daybook."  These
daybooks were not used by the high officials of the Imperial Court, but were
intended instead for the lower classes.  Probably not so low as the peasants
since in the early Imperial period they mostly couldn't read.  But the daybooks
seem to have been taken up by the next step up: petty officials, merchants, and
so forth, who at least had some minimum of education.  And it may be that they
conveyed the relevant contents of the daybooks to the illiterate peasants as
well.

The daybooks were in a sense a kind of almanac.  They would specify which days
you should or should not do various activities.  But a qualitative difference
between a western almanac and the Chinese daybook was that a western almanac
will simply inform you as to the propitious days to do various things, or
conversely unlucky days that you should avoid.  But the choice was yours to
make.  If you wanted to clip your fingernails on an unlucky day, well, it was
your funeral.  The Chinese daybook, by contrast, was written much more with a
prescriptive attitude, from a sense of authority.  It simply told you what the
correct days to do certain activities would be.  And the proscriptions varied
based on your profession.  If you were a good petty official, you would follow
the prescriptions provided by the text.  One of the surviving daybooks sets out
the specific days that a petty official could carry out his official duties, or
when he could invite commoners into his home.  But the rules can get quite
specific.  One rule says that if your home is robbed on a particular day, the
thief will have had a moustache and black moles on his face.

These daybooks are also illuminating for another reason.  They were discovered
relatively late, in the 1970s.  Archaeological excavations recovered a few
surviving examples of these texts from some tombs.  But combing through the
extensive official literature from Imperial China, you would really have no
idea that these texts were floating around.  So an almost complete absence of
any mention of these texts in the official literature is indicative of the kind
of disconnect between the highest rungs of Chinese society, about which we know
quite a lot, and the lowest, about which we know considerably less.  As far as
we can tell, the rules set forth in the daybooks were not an imperial edict.
Who exactly wrote them is unclear, but they seem to have been useful enough,
providing structure to people's lives, that people adopted the daybooks
voluntarily.

So, to sum all this up, as I have tried to make clear in the past few episodes,
the calendar was a really big deal in ancient China.  And it wasn't simply
important for regulating day-to-day life, but it had political implications as
well.  I mentioned in Episode 38 how after a dynastic upheaval, one of the
first things that a new emperor would typically do would be to proclaim a new
calendar to assert his authority.  And this leads us to the calendar reform of
104 BC.  Now, as we talked about in Episode 37, the Imperial Era of Chinese
history begins with the establishment of the Qin Dynasty, canonically held to
be in 221 BC.  The king of the Qin state managed to subdue the other six
states, bring an end to the Warring States Period, and establish himself as the
emperor of all of China.

Now, we discussed at some length the consequences of this development on
intellectual life in China in past episodes.  But despite its influence, the
Qin Dynasty was really quite short lived.  After just 15 years the Qin dynasty
had fallen to the new Han dynasty.  And these 15 years were not exactly a
peaceful time.  In addition to a steady drumbeat of rebellions across the
empire, there were several assassination attempts on the first emperor of the
Qin Dynasty Qin Shi Huang, one of which we discussed in the last episode when
we talked about Zhang Liang.  Even though none of these attempts succeeded in
killing the Emperor, they did succeed in driving him to paranoia, and as he
became older he became obsessed with finding the fabled elixir of life that
would confer immortality upon him and he went to tremendous lengths to find
this potent potable.  As we will see shortly, he was not the last Emperor to be
beguiled by this mythical potion.  One year before he was to die, the heavens
sent him an ominous sign.  A meteor fell in the lower Yellow River valley and
it was inscribed with the words "The First Emperor will die and his land will
be divided."  The Qin Emperor assumed, or at least hoped, that some treasonous
individual had written these words on the stone, but no one would confess to
the deed.  Nevertheless, just to be sure, Emperor Qin Shi Huang executed
everybody who lived nearby and had the stone destroyed.  Soon after this event
the Emperor went on a journey to the east in search of the elixir of life, but
either the journey was too difficult for his weakened spirit, or perhaps he
found some elixir that was made of mercury or some other toxin and it poisoned
him.  Whatever the details, the first emperor of the Qin dynasty died during
this journey.

Now, similar to the empire of Alexander the Great, the Chinese Empire under the
Qin Dynasty was essentially just held together by the sheer force of will of a
single man, and when he was gone, it immediately began to fragment.  There were
a few claimants to the throne who jockeyed for power, but none had the
competence of Qin Shi Huang, and the many enemies that he had created across
the empire exploited this opportunity to rise up and seize power for
themselves.  This led to a chaotic four year period called the Chu-Han
contention, but when the dust had settled in 202 BC, the ruler of the Han
state, Liu Bang, found himself on top and established himself as the new
emperor of all of China.

Now this was quite unprecedented in Chinese history.  The Qin dynasty had
been the first true Imperial dynasty in China, so how was Imperial succession
from one dynasty to another supposed to work?  It seems that Liu Bang was
initially somewhat reluctant to claim the imperial throne and preferred to
simply rule an independent Han state, but he was persuaded by his court to
establish his own dynasty.

But this whole sequence of events was messy and chaotic.  The empire as a
concept had only been around for about twenty years, and during much of that
time it was fending off attacks from all sides.  When the new rulers fell into
this role they had to frantically build up the machinery of an imperial state.
The historian Sima Qian, who is one of the most important sources we have for
this time period, wrote:

> At that time, the empire had only just been settled, and they were only just
> about to knit together the foundational structures; when later the High
> Empress ruled though a woman, there was still no leisure for dealing with
> matters [like the calendar].  So they continued using the standard
> conjunction and ritual colors of Qin.

It was also not entirely obvious to the new emperors how much continuity there
should be between the old dynasty and the new.  Was the role of Emperor to be
conceived of as sitting above any petty concepts of clan or dynasty ---
continuous across the ages?  Or should the establishment of a new dynasty be
marked decisively as a new era, a clean break from what came before?  Given
that the Qin Dynasty had been so short lived, the new Han rulers tended to err
on the side of conservatism.  They were simply the current occupants of the
Imperial throne.  The earlier emperors had the Mandate of Heaven, and now they
had the Mandate of Heaven.  They were not exactly claiming to replace the
earlier dynasty, so there was continuity with the past.

Now, prior to the establishment of the Qin Dynasty, dynasties in Ancient China
had been associated with one of the five elements that I discussed in the last
episode, earth, wood, metal, fire, and water.  This association shows up, for
instance, in the Spring and Autumn Annals.  Now, as we learned in the last
episode, these five elements were related to each other cyclically: wood
depletes the Earth, metal chops wood, fire melts metal, water extinguishes
fire, and earth dams up water.  In this association with the dynasties, each
successive dynasty was associated with the element that would conquer the
previous.  So the earliest emperor in this cycle, the mythical Yellow Emperor,
was associated with Earth, the subsequent Xia Dynasty was associated with Wood,
Shang was associated with metal, and Zhou fire.  The author of the Spring and
Autumn Annals predicted that the following dynasty would be associated with
water, writing

> What replaces fire must put water in the lead.  Moreover Heaven will first
> make it manifest that the qi of water is in the ascendancy.  The qi of water
> being in the ascendancy, the new dynasty will give precedence to black.

And indeed, in order to assert his authority over China and the establishment
of his new Qin Dynasty, Qin Shi Huang adopted the element of water as his
Imperial symbol.  And as we saw in the last episode, these elements did not
just exist all on their own --- there was a whole host of other associations
that came along with them.  So the element water was also associated with the
color black, the number six, the direction of north, and the planet Mercury.
Consequently the imperial robes during the Qin dynasty were black, and the
number six was frequently referenced.  Six horses, for instance, would pull the
imperial carriage.

So, once the short lived Qin Dynasty fell and Emperor Gaozu of the Han state
took his place, he initially adopted the same symbolism of the Qin Dynasty
since he was not exactly claiming to be replacing it with a new dynasty.  This
state of affairs lasted for around forty years or so.  After the death of
Emperor Gaozu he was nominally succeeded by his son, Emperor Hui, but really it
was his mother, the Empress Lu, who ran things.  If you recall from the last
episode, it's around this time that Empress Lu had one of the late emperor's
concubines murdered in a spectacularly grisly fashion and the court astronomers
falsified the occurrence of a solar eclipse.  Emperor Hui died at the age of 22
after devoting his short adulthood to liquor and sex, and his reign was
followed by two more short-lived emperors.  Emperor Qianshao ascended the
throne at the age of 5 and was murdered by the Empress Lu about four years
later, and he was followed by Emperor Houshao who ascended the throne at the
age of 12.  Emperor Houshao managed to outlive his bloodthirsty grandmother,
but he was too young to hope to effectively wield power and was soon deposed in
a palace coup and the hapless Emperor was executed shortly thereafter.

The man who orchestrated this coup was another son of the first emperor of the
Han Dynasty.  He took the name Emperor Wen, and despite his underhanded means
of ascending to the throne, he was by all accounts a competent ruler and
brought a long-awaited period of stability to China.  It is said that during
his reign the storehouses were so full of grain that some of it rotted away
before it could be eaten.  Now, as you can imagine, having a succession of
child emperors and then having them murdered after a few years was not
conducive to getting things done.  Well, thirteen years into the reign of
Emperor Wen, in 167 BC, things had at long last settled down and the emperor
had been faithfully attending to matters of state.  It's at this time that a
man named Gongsun Chen came before him with a proposal.  Now Gongsun Chen was
not a member of the Imperial court, he was, it seems an independent scholar,
but nevertheless he made so bold as to advise the emperor that he should adopt
the symbolism of a new dynasty rather than continuing with the iconography of
the Qin Dynasty.  He wrote,

> In the beginning Qin obtained the power of water.  Now Han has inherited it.
> Predicting in accordance with the succession of the end and beginning then
> Han corresponds to the power of Earth.  In response to the power of Earth, a
> yellow dragon will be seen.  It would be appropriate to change the standard
> conjunction and change the ritual color, so as to exalt yellow.

Now you might think that the emperor would have accepted this proposal
enthusiastically.  But such a thing was seen as a weighty decision, and the
Emperor should not make it casually.  He ought to have confidence from the
signs of heaven that he was meant to do such a thing --- otherwise he might
provoke heavenly wrath.  One of his advisors, Zhang Cang, argued that no such
signs had been seen.  In Sima Qian's history, we read:

> At that time the Chancellor Zhang Cang excelled in harmonics and astronomical
> systems, and he held that Han had its origin in the power of Water, and that
> the Yellow River having overflowed at the Gold Dyke was an omen of that.
> Beginning the year in the tenth month, with the colors black outside and red
> within, was in correspondence with the governing power.  As for what Gongsun
> Chen said, it was wrong.  So Gongsun Chen was dismissed.

But even if Gongsun Chen's idea was not immediately taken up, he had planted
the seed of change.  And soon, the signs began to appear.  Two years later, it
was reported that a yellow dragon was seen in the northwest of the country,
just has Gongsun Chen had predicted.  Having been vindicated, Emperor Wen
brought Gongsun Chen back, appointed him to his court, bestowing upon him high
honors, and made him responsible for planning the transition to the new set of
rituals for the newly established dynasty, including the introduction of a new
calendar.

As Gongsun Chen underwent the preparations for the dynastic transition, the
auspicious signs just kept mounting.  A sorcerer named Xinyuan Ping from the
state of Zhao showed up at the court and he claimed to be able to discern the
spiritual world.  He had noticed that there was increasing activity in the
world of the spirits and wanted to call attention to this to the Emperor.  He
predicted that the Emperor would soon be gifted a jade cup with a secret
inscription on it.  Sure enough, not long after, someone presented the emperor
with an inscribed jade cup.  Xinyuan Ping also reported that on one day the Sun
had passed overhead at noon as usual, then turned back and passed overhead a
second time.  The Emperor was extremely excited by these signs and he decreed
that henceforth the years would be counted not from the date he ascended the
throne, but from the date of these auspicious events.  But a good thing cannot
last forever, and it seems that Xinyuan Ping did not, in fact, possess a
connection to the spiritual realm.  Upon closer investigation Emperor Wen
decided that he was a fraud and had him executed.  After this disappointment
Emperor Wen lost his enthusiasm for the pomp and circumstance around a dynastic
change and an invasion of nomads from the north drew his attention to more
earthly matters and he died the following year.

His successor was his son, Emperor Jing, who did not seem to have been as
interested in the superstitions that had beguiled his father.  Emperor Jing
more or less continued his father's policies and executed them competently, but
the idea of a calendar reform stagnated during the 16 years of his reign.  In
141 BC Emperor Jing died and he was succeeded by his son, Emperor Wu, who
turned out to be one of the longest reigning emperors in all of Chinese
history.  Like his father, and has grandfather before him, Emperor Wu was also
a competent administrator.  But unlike his father, and to a greater extent than
his grandfather, Emperor Wu was much more spiritual.  His father and
grandfather had been advised by scholars who had synthesized the legalist
tradition favored by the Qi Dynasty with Taoism.  The traditional Confucian
school had been marginalized during their rule.  But Emperor Wu found the
Confucian school much more to his taste.  He decreed that the legalist school
"disturbed the good order of the state," and ordered a revival of the plans to
establish the new dynastic rituals, along with a new calendar.

With the Confucian school ascendant, the formerly powerless Confucian scholars
began to press for the emperor to perform the fabled feng and shan rituals.
Now just a few words about the feng and shan rituals.  These were perhaps the
most important and powerful rituals in the Confucian tradition.  The feng and
shan rituals consisted of two parts: a sacrifice to heaven, and a sacrifice to
Earth, and could only be legitimately performed by the Emperor himself.  The
Emperor would ascend to the highest mountain, typically Mount Tai, and offer a
sacrifice to heaven at the summit, and then descend the mountain and offer a
sacrifice to Earth at the base.  Having done so, the Emperor, in his person,
would join together heaven and Earth, and thereby receive the Mandate of
Heaven.  The precise nature of the sacrifices is not entirely clear.  Sima
Qian, the great historian of this era, described that the emperor would build
an altar out of rock and soil at the summit of the mountain, and would clear a
patch of land at the base of the mountain.  But the unusual feature of the feng
and shan rituals is that they were considered to be so powerful that they were
performed exceedingly rarely.  In all of Chinese history the feng and shan
rituals were only recorded as having been performed on six occasions.  It was
believed that an emperor could only secure the Mandate of Heaven through these
rituals if there had been a long period of peace and stability with numerous
good omens.  Then, he had to perform the ritual exactly.  But the trouble was,
because the last time the ritual had been performed was centuries in the past,
it was never clear to a sitting emperor who wanted to perform these rites what
exactly they were.  There was no one alive who had seen it before.  He would
need to counsel from scholars who poured over the ancient texts for clues, and
he would consult diviners who would contact the spiritual world and learn from
them what the appropriate rites were.  And it goes without saying that he would
have to stay apprised of any omens in the heavens, and choose the most
auspicious moment to perform these rituals.

So, all this is to say that when the Confucian scholars in Emperor Wu's court
began to lobby for him to perform the feng and shan rites, it was a very big
deal and something to take very seriously.  Now, in the broader political
history of China, Emperor Wu's reign is characterized by an unprecedented
expansion in the size of the Chinese Empire.  Prior to his reign, the Chinese
Empire more or less spanned the areas around the Yellow and Yangtze rivers.
But during his reign the Empire expanded south as far as modern day Vietnam,
north to the Korean peninsula, and west as far as Kyrgyzstan.  The state became
more centralized and professional.  But despite these major changes, it was not
really the focus of Emperor's energy.  He seems to have appointed competent
people to carry out this program, but his own personal focus was on far more
spiritual matters.  In particular, he wanted to revive the ancient imperial
rituals that brought together heaven and earth, most importantly the feng and
shan rituals, and as time went on, he also became obsessed with the idea of
immortality.  For a time he took to drinking a concoction that his doctors
called a spiritual dew, which consisted of taking the morning dew and mixing it
with finely ground jade.  Apparently, though, the spiritual dew eventually made
him violently ill and he had to stop drinking it. 

Now, at the end of the last episode I talked about the Taoist idea of the
"xian," an immortal spirit.  I mentioned that from time to time a xian might
visit the Earth, whether as a hermit living in a cave in a remote mountain, as
in the case of Huang Shigong, or within the Imperial court, as with Dongfang
Shuo.  But most of the time, the xians were said to take up residence on Mount
Penglai.  This Mount Penglai was supposed to be on an island some way out in
the Pacific Ocean and was an enchanted land.  The palaces were made of gold and
silver, jewels grew on trees, there was no suffering, and your rice bowl and
wine glass would never empty, no matter how much you ate or drank.  But beyond
these sensual pleasures, the island was said to be the source of the elixir of
life, the mysterious potion which the mother goddess of the west brought to the
Imperial court in the last episode, and which was gifted to the archer Hou Yi.
This glorious realm was tended by a sorcerer named Master Anqi, himself a xian,
who was now more than 1000 years old and who could make himself invisible.

Well, around eight years into Emperor Wu's reign, a man named Li Shaojun
arrived at the court.  Li Shaojun claimed that he was hundreds of years old,
although he was circumspect about his precise age.  During a feast, one of the
guests was an official who was over 90 years old.  Li Shaojun told the old man
that he had known his grandfather well, and that he had practised archery with
him at a particular spot.  The old man remembered accompanying his grandfather
to that very spot when he was a young boy.

Well, among his various exploits that he recounted to the Imperial court, he
said that had, in fact, visited Mount Penglai and met Master Anqi.  Li Shaojun
told the emperor that if he, too, wished to visit Mount Penglai and receive the
elixir of life, that could be arranged.  He would have to prepare himself by
performing a set of rituals to make him worthy to visit the fabled land.  He
pointed to the example of the legendary Yellow Emperor, who had performed the
feng and shan rituals and thereby achieved immortality for himself.  This
suggestion sparked a fierce debate within the court with two factions.  One
faction aligned themselves with Li Shaojun and argued that the feng and shan
rituals were to be done with the aim of achieving immortality.  A more
conservative, less superstitious, faction argued that the feng and shan rituals
were more to express gratitude to heaven and earth, maintain harmony between
the two, and achieve the Mandate of Heaven.

But Emperor Wu was much more interested in one of these interpretations --- the
one that would give him eternal life.  Now, as it happened, the centuries old
Li Shaojun died not too long after this.  At least that is what the skeptics
said.  For Emperor Wu this was just further evidence of Li Shaojun's spiritual
credentials.  Having completed the task he had set out to do on Earth he had
metamorphosed into a xian and slipped off the bonds of the physical world.

But this still left Emperor Wu in a bind.  Li Shaojun had been his only contact
with Mount Penglai.  So the call went out for anyone else who could show the
emperor to this storied land.  And sure enough, a parade of individuals
followed, all of whom claimed various connections to the spiritual world.
Coming forward in this way seems to have been a high risk high reward strategy
for the purported diviners.  Most of them seem to have been executed as frauds.
As an example, in 120 BC, one figure, named Shao Weng, managed to summon the
spirit of a deceased concubine of the emperor.  But whatever he did that was so
convincing, he seems to have been unable to repeat the trick and a year passed
without an further contact with the spiritual realm.  Desperate for something,
anything, he seems to have written out a message from a spirit which he then
claimed to have discovered.  But the emperor noticed the similarity of the
handwriting of this spirit's note with Shao Weng's own handwriting, and had the
hapless diviner executed.

A somewhat more successful diviner, at least for a time, was Luan Da.  He
arrived at court and claimed to have been an assistant of Li Shaojun.  He said
that he had accompanied Li Shaojun on his trip to Mount Penglai and had even
briefly met Master Anqi.  Unfortunately, he said that as he was a mere
commoner, he was not permitted to accompany Li Shaojun onto the island, and so
he was not privy to any of its secrets.  To demonstrate his credentials he
produced a kind of chess board with game pieces on it and by chanting he caused
the pieces to move of their own accord.  Today it's believed that he probably
used a magnetic rock like a lodestone to accomplish this feat.  In turn Luan Da
expressed some skepticism towards the emperor.  He said that he had heard that
many of his fellow sorcerers had been executed --- how could he be sure that he
would not meet the same fate?  The emperor reassured Luan Da that these were
simply rumors.  And what's more, it seems that Emperor Wu had come to regret
these executions --- after all, what if they hadn't been frauds after all, and
he had killed the only men who knew the secret of the elixir of life?  At any
rate, if Luan Da's main obstacle to finding the elixir of life was that he was
a commoner, that was something that was easily fixed.  Overnight Luan Da rose
from his humble origins to become the second most influential man in the
palace.  Tantalized by the prospect of at long last obtaining the elixir of
life, Emperor Wu gave him not just one, but four of the highest noble titles,
married him to his eldest daughter, and gave him an enormous dowry, along with
a vast estate and a mansion supported by a thousand servants.  Luan Do took
with ease to his newfound role as one of the most important men in the Imperial
Court.  He did so so naturally, in fact, that he more or less never bothered
with upholding his end of the bargain and journeying to Mount Penglai.  After
around a year, the emperor sent a messenger to him and reminded him of his
appointed task.  He tried to postpone his journey a few times, pleading that he
needed more time for preparation, but eventually he realized he needed to go
before the Emperor's patience ran out.  So he made a great show of leaving
court and traveling east to return to Mount Penglai.  For his part, the emperor
sent a spy to trail Luan Da and report back as to what he saw.  Luan Da and his
company travelled to Mount Tai, and there on the mountain he performed a ritual
to summon a xian who would provide him directions to Mount Penglai.  After the
ritual no xians appeared, but this was expected.  Luan Da told his assistants
that this was because they were commoners.  They would need to descend the
mountain and he would go forward on his own to meet the immortal.  So he went
on alone, but unbeknownst to him, was being followed by the Emperor's spy.  The
spy saw Luan Da walk around a little bit, but no xians appeared.  When Luan Da
returned to court he said that he had had great success.  A xian had appeared
to him and had told him how to find Mount Penglai.  But the emperor had already
been forewarned by his spy and had Luan Da executed as a fraud.

Well, as Luan Da was preparing for his journey in the summer of 113 BC, another
omen appeared.  A diviner had been performing a routine ritual at a newish
shrine of Hou Tu that the Emperor had erected when he had noticed a glint of
metal in the ground.  Curious, the diviner dug it out and discovered that it
was a strange vessel called a ding.  These were a kind of cauldron supported by
three legs with two handles and were an important symbol of authority in
ancient China.  Only the nobility were permitted to use a ding in ritual
sacrifices, and the number of dings one was permitted to use was tied to one's
noble rank.  A court scholar could use between one and three dings, a minister
could use five, and a vassal lord seven.  The Emperor alone used nine dings.
The nine cauldrons thus became a symbol of imperial authority throughout
Chinese history, in the same way as the orb and scepter were in European
history.  In all probability, this discovery really did happen.  The shrine was
likely built on the site of a more ancient shrine, and based on the fact that
the script on the newly discovered cauldron was unintelligible, it is believed
to have been a Shang Era artifact that had been buried there more than a
millennium ago and which was eventually exposed through the gradual process of
erosion.

Now, despite his seemingly credulous nature, Emperor Wu was initially not sure
that this discovery of an Imperial cauldron was a good omen.  After all, the
Emperor pointed out that there had recently been a string of bad omens: in
particular harvest failures and floods.  But his officials assured him that
this was a good omen, and no small thing.  They pointed to past discoveries of
a ding, and it was always a sign of heavenly favor for a wise and just ruler.

Well, a few months later, another individual arrived at Court.  This was a man
named Gongsun Qing, and he was somewhat cannier than the earlier diviners.  He
never claimed to be able to contact the spirits himself, he simply had a number
of acquaintances who were able to do this and he never hesitated to pass along
their stories to the Emperor.  He said that he had been in contact with a well
known diviner named Shen Gong, who had, in turn, spoken to Master Anqi at Mount
Penglai.  Unfortunately Shen Gong had died, but he had left his writings to
Gongsun Qing, and many of these emphasized the importance of the Imperial
cauldrons.  Gongsun Qing also seems to have had some training in astronomy and
used it to bolster his case.  Gongsun Qing's thesis was that there were
substantial parallels between the reign of the great Yellow Emperor and the
events of the present day.  The Yellow Emperor, too, had discovered a regal
cauldron during his reign.  What is more, that year, the winter solstice fell
on the first day of the month and the 46th day of the sexagenary cycle, the
cycle of 60 days that I discussed in the last episode.  From the histories,
Gongsun Qing noted that 380 years later, the Yellow Emperor had then performed
a special rite at Tripod Lake, during which he cast a new bronze cauldron using
ore from Mount Jing, and thereupon a great dragon bore up the Yellow Emperor to
heaven, along with seventy lucky officials.  Gongsun Qing calculated that the
year that happened, the winter solstice fell on the first day of the month and
it was also the first day of the sexagenary cycle.  In Gongsun Qing's
interpretation, this was clearly the most auspicious moment, the time that the
Emperor would achieve immortality.  This event, the correspondence between the
winter solstice, the first day of the 11th month, and the first day of the
sexagenary cycle was nothing less than the start of a new era, and this
happened only every 4617 years.  Now, the Yellow Emperor had had 380 years to
prepare since the discovery of his cauldron before this auspicious time and the
attainment of immortality.  But Emperor Wu had much less warning.  These events
happened in 113 BC, and the next time this conjunction would occur, was in 105
BC, so there were only eight years to prepare.  Gongsun Qing informed the
Emperor that the preparations would not be easy.  According to Shen Gong's
writings, seventy-two past Emperors had attempted to perform the feng and shan
rites, but only the Yellow Emperor had succeeded in attaining immortality.  It
was of the utmost importance that he prepare diligently.  That year, Emperor Wu
finally acquiesced to the proposal that one faction of his had been lobbying
for, to perform a sacrifice to the Tai Yi, the Grand Unity, who was seen as the
supreme deity during the Han Dynasty.  He prayed:

> Heaven began by granting the precious cauldron and the numinous reckoning to
> me, the Sovereign Emperor; now after new moon succeeding upon new moon the
> cycle has reached its end and will begin again.  Now as Sovereign Emperor, I
> reverently perform obeisance.

He then spent the next several years with his singular focus being preparation
for the feng and shan rites.  Incidentally, during his preparations he was
performing a sacrifice at the tomb of the Yellow Emperor when he had a
realization.  The Yellow Emperor had supposedly been borne off to heaven, and
yet here he was at his tomb.  But his officials reassured him that the tomb did
not contain the Yellow Emperor's body, of course, he had indeed ascended into
heaven.  But his robe and hat had fallen off in the ascent, and they had been
buried here.  This answer seemed to satisfy Emperor Wu.

By the year 110 BC, Emperor Wu felt that he had at long last done everything
necessary to perform the feng and shan rites, the key step to summon the
immortals and achieve immortality.  He traveled to Mount Tai in yellow robes
representing the new Han dynasty, and at its base he built an altar out of the
Earth that was nine feet tall and twelve feet long.  Below it he buried jade
tablets on which were written a secret prayer.  He then ascended to the summit
with an assistant and there he performed the secret fang rite to the Heavens.
After spending a night on the mountain, he descended in the morning and
conducted the shan rite to the Earth.  Emperor Wu was optimistic that the rites
had gone well, and indeed, a few months later, two comets appeared in the sky,
which was interpreted as an extremely auspicious omen.  All that remained now,
was for the Emperor to wait five years until that great moment when the new era
began, in December of 105 BC when the winter solstice fell on the first day of
the month and the first day of the sexagenary cycle.

Well, at this point in the story the historian we are learning all of this
from, Sima Qian, ceases to be a passive chronicler of events that came before
him, and begins to play an active role in our story.  Sima Qian's father, named
Sima Tan, had held the position of Taishi, which can be translated as Court
Astronomer, but also encompassed other clerical duties, along with maintaining
the historical record, so the title has been alternatively translated as the
Grand Clerk, or Court Scribe, or Court Historian.  Regardless, the position was
a high one in the court, and among his duties, Sima Tan was responsible for
observing, interpreting, and predicting the activities of the heavens.  Sima
Tan had been firmly in the Confucian camp that was lobbying for the Emperor to
pay reverence to the Tai Yi and to perform the feng and shan rites.
Unfortunately he was also of ill health and died in the year 110 BC, before he
was able to see this program carried out by the Emperor.  But prior to his
death he encouraged his son to follow in his footsteps.  As I mentioned back in
Episode 38, in the early Imperial Era, and before, these high offices were
hereditary positions, so Sima Tan's son, Sima Qian, inherited the role.  In
Confucian tradition, a son had to spend three years in mourning after the death
of a parent, so Sima Qian did not take up his duties until 108 BC.  Now that
the Emperor had performed the great feng and shan rituals and the arrival of
the new era was imminent, the court astronomers, with Sima Qian among them, had
to develop the new calendar for this era within the next three years.

Now, one of the unusual things about Sima Qian's narrative here is that despite
the fact that as the Court Astronomer, he clearly must have played an integral
role in the development of this new calendar, he barely touches on it in his
history, and at no point does he mention his own involvement.  To understand
what happened during this calendar reform, and to understand why Sima Qian was
so taciturn on the topic, we have to turn to a work written by the historian
Ban Gu more than a century later, called the Han Shu, or Book of Han.  Ban Gu
informs that, indeed, as we would expect, Sima Qian was intimately involved in
the calendar reform, and not only that, had been a strong proponent of the idea
that the calendar should be reformed.  The emperor then gave Sima Qian, along
with Gongsun Qing and others the go-ahead to begin to compute the new calendar.
Ban Gu writes

> Then an edict was issued to Gongsun Qing, Hu Sui, Sima Qian and the Attendant
> Gentleman Zun, the Senior Star Observer She Xing and others, that they should
> consult on the construction of a Han astronomical system.  So they fixed east
> and west, set up gnomons and set water clocks running, in order to find the
> extents of the 28 lunar mansions in the four quarters, and to seek a
> conclusion of cycles so as to fix the first and last days of months, with the
> equinoxes and solstices and to trace the orbits of crescents and full moons.

But then an interesting detail follows.

> But She Xing and his colleagues submitted a memorandum saying that they had
> been unable to perform the calculations, and they wished to recruit
> specialists in astronomical systems so as to make the measurements more
> accurate, with each proposing their own additions and subtractions, in order
> to make a [new calendar for the Han dynasty].

Later on, Ban Gu describes how these external specialists devised 18 different
calendar systems, but that Sima Qian was ordered to use the one devised by an
astronomer named Deng Ping.  Now this is an odd thing.  Sima Qian was the Court
Astronomer --- there really wasn't anyone higher than him in the org chart
apart from the emperor.  Why was he being *ordered* to use this outsider's
system?  Evidently he and the other big shots in the court were unable to get
the numbers to work out and some contractors had to be brought in to sort out
the mess, probably with the emperor's knowledge at a minimum, and maybe at his
behest.  In this light, Sima Qian's brevity on this episode in his career is
maybe more understandable.

So what was the issue in this calendar reform that everyone was having so much
trouble with?  Well, if we go back to the reason that the calendar reform was
being proposed, in the year 105 BC, the winter solstice would coincide with the
first day of the month and the first day of the sexagenary cycle, and when this
had last happened, the Yellow Emperor and much of his Court had ascended into
heaven and become immortals.  Now, if you recall, the first day of the month
was not an arbitrary date as it is in our modern calendar.  The first day of
the month was the new moon.  The problem that everyone was dealing with, is
that with modern techniques, we now know that in this year the winter solstice
fell on December twenty-third at 7:35 PM in the capital, whereas the new moon
occurred on December twenty-fourth at 7:10 AM.  The first day of the sexagenary
cycle was on December twenty-fifth.  So what probably happened is that
proponents of the calendar reform had used some approximate, out of date
techniques to figure out when the winter solstice and new moon would occur,
and, to their delight had discovered that they would coincide with the first
day of the sexagenary cycle in 105 BC.  But then they went and started to
perform more detailed observations to really nail down when the solstice and
when the new moon were, and to their dismay, found that it was not falling on
the day that it was supposed to.  This great conjunction, which was to mark the
start of a new era and bear the Emperor off into immortality, wasn't going to
happen.  This was inconvenient.  And actually, knowing the track record of
astronomical observations in the early Imperial period, this was not much of a
surprise.  As I mentioned in the last episode, the astronomers were somewhat
faithful recorders of lunar and solar eclipses.  But weirdly, solar eclipses
were not generally recorded as happening on the first day of the month, which
they should.  A solar eclipse can only happen at the very moment of a new moon,
and this was by definition the first day of the month.  But typically solar
eclipses were recorded as happening on the last day of the month, or even the
day before that.  It seems that what had happened in the early Imperial period
was that the astronomers had been calculating their calendar with a lunar
period that was somewhat too long and had gone a long time without calibrating
it.  Over the centuries, this error had built up, and by now the calendar was
running about a day ahead of where it was supposed to.  Now, to modern
astronomers, seeing a solar eclipse on any day other than a new moon is a clear
indication that you've calculated the day of the new moon wrong.  But it does
not appear that anyone in the early Imperial Era noticed that this was a
problem.  So this error in the calculation of the date of the new moon lurked
beneath the surface until it became a big honking problem during the calendar
reform of 104 BC.

Now, fortunately, the techniques available to astronomers of the time made this
a surmountable obstacle.  In the end, Deng Ping was in the end able to square
this circle.  The fact of the matter was that it was difficult to measure the
winter solstice very accurately.  They were using a gnomon and measuring the
length of a shadow at noon near the winter solstice to determine its date, and
because the Sun's elevation doesn't change very much around this time, it's
hard to measure the date to better than a few days.  And likewise it is
difficult to determine the time of a new moon, particularly if you are not
taking advantage of solar eclipse observations.  So there was a lot of wiggle
room.  It seems that Deng Ping tweaked the length of the month and the year to
be a little longer than it had been in previous system. The month was 1.1
seconds longer and the year was 14 seconds longer.  And by using a reference
point far enough in the past he was able to nudge the expected date of the
solstice and new moon in 105 BC to be December 25, the first day of the
sexagenary cycle.  And so Deng Ping saved the day, quite literally, and Emperor
Wu would be able to go to heaven after all.

Well, as a postscript to the events that led up to the calendar reform of 104
BC, Emperor Wu did not end up ascending into heaven as he had hoped when the
grand conjunction arrived.  Nevertheless, ever the true believer, he did not
lose hope and continued to pursue the secret of immortality right up until he
died in 87 BC.  Sima Qian died just one year later, but the last two decades of
his life were somewhat more difficult.  In 99 BC, Sima Qian became caught up in
some palace intrigue called the Li Ling affair.  Without going into too many
details, Li Ling was a general who was blamed for a disastrous defeat in the
north.  Although he was not close to Li Ling, Sima Qing respected him and seems
to have said some words in his defense at court.  But the other general who was
involved in this defeat was Li Guangli, who was the brother-in-law of the
emperor, and the emperor interpreted Sima Qian's defense of Li Ling as casting
blame on his brother-in-law --- and on himself by extension.  As punishment, he
was given the choice between execution and castration.  Now, ordinarily a man
of his rank would have rather committed suicide than undergo the humiliation of
castration.  But Sima Qian, the consummate scholar, chose castration so that he
could finish his books, despite describing it as "the worst of all
punishments."  For this, those of us interested in the history of astronomy,
and the history of China more generally, are eternally grateful.

Well, I had hoped to talk in more detail about the lunar mansions in this
episode, but I am afraid it will have to wait until next month.  Then, I
promise, we will at long last learn about the system of lunar mansions, as well
as a few of the greatest astronomers in Chinese history: Zhang Heng, and Shen
Kuo.  I hope you'll join me then.  Until the next full moon, good night and
clear skies.

## Additional references

* Cullen, Christopher, Heavenly Numbers
* Needham, Science and Civilisation in China, Vol. 3
