---
categories: episode
date: '2024-02-29'
description: We turn to the ways that the Chinese Emperor's astronomers predicted
  and interpreted eclipses, as well as the so-called "guest stars" that they occasionally
  reported observing in the skies. Then we discuss the role of the planets, particularly
  Jupiter. Towards the end we hear a few examples of astronomy in Chinese folklore.
keywords:
- astronomy
- history
layout: episode
number: 39
title: The Guest Stars
---

## Transcript

Good evening, and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon.  My
name is Joe Antognini.

Last month we looked at the three major cosmological theories in China that
emerged during the early Imperial period.  This month I wanted to focus on some
of the other pillars of Chinese astronomy: eclipses, records of the guest
stars, and the planets.  Then towards the end I wanted to give a flavor of
astronomy in Chinese folklore.  But, before we can get to the folktales, I have
to start with the official stuff.

Now, as I have been at pains to convey in the last two episodes, Chinese
astronomy was intimately associated with the Emperor.  Chinese astronomers, at
least the most significant of them, were employed by the Emperor and held high
positions in the Imperial Court.  And more fundamentally, it was conceived as
flowing from the Emperor just like all the other fruits of civilization.  As
one of the great early scholars of Chinese astronomy, Léopold de Saussure
wrote,

> While among the Greeks, the astronomer was a private person, a philosopher, a
> lover of the truth (as Ptolemy said of Hipparchus), as often as not on
> uncertain terms with the priests of his city; in China, on the contrary, he
> was intimately connected with the sovereign pontificate of the Son of Heaven,
> part of an official government service, and ritually accommodated within the
> very walls of the imperial palace.

Nowhere was the importance of the astronomers to the Chinese state more
apparent than in the study of eclipses.  As in every society, eclipses were
seen as perhaps the most astrologically significant phenomenon.  And they did
not portend anything good.  After all, when the very sun or moon is blotted out
from the sky, a kind of apocalyptic feeling is only natural.  And, if you have
ever seen a total solar eclipse in person, you'll know that feeling, since the
Sun doesn't just go away the same way it does during a sunset.  As the sun sets
in the evening it's always low on the sky, and as such, its light is passing
through a lot of atmosphere.  As I talked about back in Episode 33 on the
history of blue moons, the shorter wavelengths of light scatter in the
atmosphere much more strongly than the longer wavelengths do, so when the sun's
light passes through that much atmosphere, the color of the light changes quite
dramatically, with the reds, oranges, and yellows becoming much more prominent.
This is why the hour before sunset is known as the Golden Hour in photography.
Well, during a solar eclipse, the Sun's light also dims, but because the Sun is
still high in the sky, there is no corresponding change to the color.  So it
gets dark, but the light is still quite blue, which produces an exceedingly
eerie effect.

Well, at any rate, in China, as with everywhere else, a lunar or solar eclipse
was perceived as a harbinger of doom.  But, there was a way out.  If the
eclipse was predicted in advance it was not seen as being a necessarily bad
omen --- it could be interpreted through a variety astrological techniques to
mean a lot of different things.  But if there was an unexpected eclipse that
was quite different.  This was an indication of great discord between heaven
and Earth --- and because the Emperor was at the center of the Earth, that
meant great trouble for the emperor.  The connection between the state of the
heavens and the emperor was described in the I Ching like this:

> The character of the great man is identical to that of Heaven and Earth; his
> brilliance is identical with that of the sun and the moon; his order is
> identical with that of the four seasons, and his good and evil fortunes are
> identical with those of spiritual beings.

So one of the principal jobs of Chinese astronomers up and down the ages was to
predict lunar and solar eclipses.  Now, fortunately for them, the standards of
a successful prediction were somewhat lax, at least relative to what you might
expect, especially in the early days.  In general it was okay if the
astronomers predicted an eclipse and it didn't happen.  That might simply have
signified that the emperor had heard the warning from heaven, corrected his
course, and averted the impending disaster.  And as prediction techniques
became more sophisticated it was also acceptable for eclipse predictions to be
within a particular cycle.  In practice this meant that the date could be off
by 5 or 6 months or 11 or 12 months, though dates that were in separate cycles,
like a date that was off by, say 2 or 4 months, would be counted as an
incorrect prediction.

Now, until contact with Western astronomy in the 17th century, Chinese methods
to predict eclipses were fundamentally phenomenological.  They had extensive
records of observed eclipses and identified patterns in those records.  Over
the centuries the patterns they identified became more sophisticated, but it
was never connected quantitatively to an underlying theory of eclipses.  One of
the rather surprising features of Chinese eclipse theory is that although they
became fairly successful at predicting eclipses, they never made use of the
Saros cycle of around 19 years, as did many other civilizations.  Instead, by
the 1st century BC they had hit upon a 135 month cycle during which 23 eclipses
would occur.  By the 3rd century AD they had an improved understanding of the
Moon's orbit called the Nine Roads of the Moon, which I'll discuss in more
detail a little later.  From this Chinese astronomers estimated that the Moon's
orbit was inclined to the ecliptic at an angle of about 6° and by the late 4th
century an astronomer named Chiang Chi was making predictions about the extent
of totality of an eclipse.  By the early 7th century the techniques had become
sophisticated enough that Chinese astronomers were making predictions about the
time of first and last contact of an eclipse as well as the position in the
heavens.  Chinese eclipse prediction methods appear to have reached their
zenith perhaps in the early Song dynasty around the 10th or 11th centuries.  As
I mentioned in the last episode, a kind of bureaucratic rot set in in the
Astronomical Bureau in the later Song dynasty, despite the efforts of some
quite capable astronomers to fix it.  We have a reference to an eclipse in the
13th century AD where apparently a private individual predicted a different
time for some solar eclipse than the royal astronomers.  The royal astronomers
predicted that the eclipse was to happen at night, and thus would not be seen,
but the private individual predicted it would happen during the day.  And
indeed the eclipse did in fact happen during the day.  The citizen scientist
was correct and the royal astronomers were wrong.  As a consequence we read in
the reference that the head of the Astronomical Bureau, along with several of
his officials were put on trial for negligence, found guilty, and severely
punished.  Throughout the later Ming dynasty from the 14th to 17th centuries
the quality of the state astronomers fell even further and this was reflected
in a decline in the accuracy of the eclipse predictions.  And as we'll see in
the next episode, the newly arrived Jesuit astronomers were able to exploit
this decline to integrate themselves into the Imperial Court.

But I am getting ahead of myself.  Perhaps one contributing factor for this
decline was that by the time of the Song dynasty observation and prediction had
become organizationally separated from each other.  The astronomers who made
predictions of future eclipses were housed in an entirely separate department
from the astronomers who made observations of them.  Now, throughout the
history of science there has always been some division of labor between
theorists and experimentalists.  But it has often been the case that anytime
theorists and observers are brought to work more closely together there have
been more discoveries, and when they have been more decoupled there has been
more stagnation, at least as far as such a general rule can go.  And this may
have also been the case during the Song dynasty.

As for the records themselves of the eclipses, it's perhaps no surprise that
they go back quite a long way for a civilization as ancient as China's.  The
earliest records are rather sporadic, but there are some oracle bones from the
Shang dynasty in the 2nd millennium BC that indicate the observation of an
eclipse.  More systematic records begin during the Spring and Autumn Period
starting in the 8th century BC.  One of the commentaries on the canonical
history of the era, the Spring and Autumn Annals, called the Zuo Zhuan, or
Commentary of Zuo, preserves the records of solar eclipses from this period.
The text describes the period from 721--468 BC and during this period 37 solar
eclipses were recorded.  Interestingly, the first solar eclipse in this work
was recorded as taking place in 720 BC, which is just one year after the first
eclipse recorded in the Almagest in the West in 721 BC.  During the Han
Dynasty, records of solar eclipses were preserved in the Han Shu, or Book of
Han, which has 55 solar eclipses.

Now, one of the neat things about these records is that with modern
astronomical techniques we can go back and check their accuracy.  And generally
the records are indeed quite accurate, at least in the sense that nearly all of
the recorded eclipses did in fact occur.  But the records were by no means
complete.  The Zuo Zhuan recorded 21 so-called "striking" solar eclipses, which
were either total, annular, or very nearly total, and so were unlikely to be
missed.  But there were 14 other striking solar eclipses that occurred during
this period that were not recorded.  The completeness of the Book of Han is
even worse, 12 striking eclipses were recorded whereas 28 were missed.  Now,
one possible explanation for these omissions is that they were simply missed
due to the weather.  It was cloudy, say, and they couldn't be seen.  The
problem with this explanation is that if you look at the distribution of when
the missed eclipses occurred during the year, they're all evenly distributed
throughout.  If the eclipses had just been missed due to the weather you'd
expect more of them to have been missed during the winter when it's cloudier.
But that doesn't seem to have been the case.

What seems to have been going on instead is that these eclipses were probably
in fact observed by the imperial astronomers, or most of them anyway, maybe a
few really were missed because of bad weather.  But most of the missing
eclipses appear to have been omitted from the historical record for political
reasons.  In general, the sparsity of the eclipse record seems to correlate
with the popularity of the emperor at the time.  During the reigns of popular
emperors very few eclipses are recorded, whereas the astronomers seem to have
been more diligent at recording for posterity the occurrence of eclipses during
the reigns of unpopular emperors.  Now, it should be said here, that when I say
the popularity of an emperor, I really mean the popularity among the elite
class of scholar-officials in Chinese society, since it's their records that we
are going off of.  Some of these unpopular emperors may have been quite popular
with the masses, but due to who was writing the texts it's hard to say with
great confidence what the real feelings of the masses were.  That said,
probably many of the unpopular emperors were really just all around bad guys,
unpopular with everyone and for good reason.

Now, despite the fact that Chinese astronomers were somewhat selective in their
recordings of eclipses, this selection effect largely went only one way.  If
there had been an eclipse, it may or may not have been recorded.  But it was
very rare for them to fabricate an eclipse into the record that never occurred
in reality.  That said, very rare is not never.  After the death of the Emperor
Gaozu in the early 2nd century BC, his widow, the Empress Lu effectively took
control of the state by ruling in the name of her teenaged son once he
nominally took the title of Emperor.  In no time at all she poisoned another
son that the late emperor had had with a concubine.  Then to really drive the
point home she apparently chopped off the limbs of the concubine, gouged out
her eyes, cut off her tongue, nose, and ears, and threw her in a pigsty.  So,
for these deeds among others, Empress Lu evidently merited a made-up eclipse
during her reign.

Well, as for a theory of eclipses, as I mentioned earlier, when it came to
prediction the techniques were largely empirical.  But when it came to an
explanation of what caused the eclipse, there were a few competing theories.
One of these theories is already familiar to us from our tour of Indian
astronomy.  During the Han dynasty, contact with India increased, and brought
with it, most importantly, Buddhism to China.  But other Indian ideas came into
China during this period as well.  One of these was the Rahu and Ketu theory of
eclipses.  The basic idea was that there were two invisible planets, named Rahu
and Ketu, at the nodes of the Moon's orbit, where it intersects with the
ecliptic.  When the Sun and Moon passed through the nodes, these invisible
planets would swallow up the Sun or Moon, causing the eclipse.  More
mythologically Rahu and Ketu were conceived of as snakes, literally devouring
the Sun or Moon and subsequently disgorging them.  As we'll see a little bit
later, this wasn't the only instance of invisible planets in Chinese astronomy,
there was also a theory that there was an invisible counter-Jupiter.

The earliest record of eclipses being due to the shadow of the Earth or the
Moon is in 20 BC by the astronomer Liu Hsiang.  By a century later this theory
seems to have become more popular.  One reference gave a fairly complete
description.  It said that the Sun is like fire and the Moon and planets like
water --- the fire produces the light and the water reflects it.  If the Earth
came between the Sun and the Moon the shadow from Earth onto the Moon produced
a lunar eclipse.  If the Moon came between the Earth and the Sun it produced a
solar eclipse.  And the same could happen with planets as well.  If a planet
passed between the Earth and a star, it would produce an occultation, or
likewise if the Moon passed between the Earth and a star.

However, these two theories were not the only theories of eclipses at the time.
Another, more astrological, theory held that the Moon was influenced by other
heavenly bodies.  The planets and even stars like Arcturus and Antares could,
through their astrological influence, cause an eclipse and temporarily
extinguish the Moon.  Another astronomer named Wang Chhung made a lengthy
argument against the theory that eclipses are caused by shadows.  And his
conception was quite different.  He held that celestial bodies behaved in a
similar way to creatures on Earth, which all follow their own internal rhythms.
Just as there is a rhythm of sleep and wakefulness, or of tides ebbing and
flowing, so it is with the Sun and the Moon.  Periodically their light ebbs
away and then returns, and this is entirely under their own, internal rhythms.

Well, although eclipses were the most important events that the royal
astronomers had to be on the lookout for, there were other celestial phenomena
that they were concerned with as well.  Over the ages as the astronomers
observed the skies, at least the ones in the observational subdivision, they
would sporadically notice and record new stars that appeared in the sky.  As I
mentioned in the last episode these records are today quite valuable because
they are the most complete record in history of the appearance of comets,
novae, and supernovae prior to the advent of the scientific revolution.  The
oldest of these records was written on an oracle bone around 1300 BC and reads,

> On the 7th day of the month, a chi-ssu day, a great new star appeared in
> company with Antares.

A second oracle bone from the same site recorded, "On the hsin-wei day the new
star dwindled." Now, the hsin-wei day is two days after chi-ssu mentioned in
the first oracle bone, so it is quite possible that these two oracle bones
recorded the same event.  This description would be consistent with a nova,
which would suddenly appear in the sky and then fade after a couple of days.
Now, in these early days, Chinese astronomers used the term "hsin hsing" to
describe these new stars, and the term literally translates to "new star." But
around the middle of the Han dynasty, say the early 1st century AD, the term
"hsin hsing" falls out of use and was replaced by the term "kho hsing," which
literally translates to "guest star."  Now, today we know that the guest stars
that Chinese astronomers recorded were typically comets, novae, and very
occasionally, supernovae.  And it is our good fortune that the descriptions
were fairly detailed.  The astronomers would include the time of the appearance
of the new star, the duration of its appearance, its brightness, its color and
a description of its shape.  There were three kinds of shapes: huixing, which
literally translates to "broom star," and refers to comets with a prominent
tail; beixing, which literally translates to "fuzzy stars," and usually
referred to comets without visible tails; and poxing, which literally
translates to something like "sparkling star," and referred to a bright,
point-like object, which often was a nova or supernova.  An example description
of a guest star from 185 AD goes like this:

> In the 2nd year of the Chung-Phing reign-period, in the tenth month, on a
> kuei-hai day, a guest-star appeared in the midst of the constellation Nan
> Mén; it was as big as the half of a bamboo mat and showed the five colours in
> turn, now beaming now lowering. It diminished in brightness little by little
> and finally disappeared about July of the following year.

Given this description, particularly that it lasted for more than half a year,
this event was presumably a Type Ia supernova, and this is in fact the earliest
plausible record of a supernova in human history.  A candidate for the remnant
from this supernova is still visible today with the rather impersonal name RCW
86.

Well guest stars were not nearly as astrologically significant as eclipses
were, and there wasn't as consistent an astrological interpretation of these
objects, but generally speaking, they were seen as being especially relevant
for military campaigns.  

Now when we were looking at eclipses one of the things we could do is go back
and check the accuracy of the Chinese records.  Because our modern models of
orbital motion are so good, we more or less know exactly when every lunar and
solar eclipse occurred millennia ago, so we now know which ones the royal
astronomers saw and which ones they missed, or more probably, saw, but omitted
from the record.  And we also know which ones they simply made up.
Unfortunately we can't do the same thing for the guest stars, at least not to
the same completeness.  Some comets, notably Halley's comet, are periodic
and so we know when they would have been in the skies in Ancient China, but
other than that it would be hard to know which events they missed or whether
they made up any guest stars as they did on very rare occasions with the
eclipses.  But one of the interesting ways that we can validate the accuracy of
the records of guest stars is to look at their distribution across the sky.
For the "poxing," the "sparkling stars," we now know that these were almost all
novae.  Novae are outbursts that can occur when a white dwarf is accreting
matter from a red giant and the ones that we can see with the naked eye are all
within our galaxy.  And if we look at the distribution of observed novae in the
Chinese records we find that they are concentrated along the galactic plane,
which is just what we would expect.  So this indicates that in general these
guest stars were not fabricated to criticize the government or the like because
astronomers of the Han Dynasty would have had no reason to put them in the
right place on the sky.

Now, novae are quite common, on average there is a nova that is visible to the
naked eye every year or two.  Supernovae, on the other hand, can be quite a bit
more spectacular, but are also much rarer.  On average they happen in our
galaxy only every century or so.  As it happens the last galactic supernova was
Kepler's Supernova in 1604, so we are now several centuries overdue for one.  I
am hopeful that one will occur in my lifetime, it will no doubt cause quite a
commotion among astronomers.  But at any rate, one of the most spectacular
supernovae ever observed was in the summer of 1054 which produced the object
that is today called the Crab Nebula.  Now, this object was evidently seen all
over the globe as it could hardly be missed.  At its brightest it was brighter
than Venus and visible in daylight.  But the Chinese were the only civilization
to record its appearance contemporaneously.  In fact we are rather spoiled for
choice in the Chinese records because there are actually five independent
observations of the event across the empire.  One record from the city of
Khaifeng said,

> In the fifth month of the first year of the Chih-Ho reign-period, Yang
> Wei-Te, the Chief Calendrical Computer said, ‘Prostrating myself, I have
> observed the appearance of a guest-star; on the star there was a slightly
> iridescent yellow colour. Respectfully, according to the disposition for
> emperors, I have prognosticated, and the result said, “The guest-star does
> not infringe upon Aldebaran; this shows that a Plentiful One is Lord, and
> that the country has a Great Worthy.” I request that this prognostication be
> given to the Bureau of Historiography to be preserved.‘

A few weeks later the record notes its disappearance by saying

> Originally this star had become visible in June (+ 1054) in the eastern
> heavens in Thien-kuanz (Taurus). It was visible by day, like Venus; pointed
> rays shone out from it on all sides. The colour was reddish-white. Altogether
> it was visible for twenty-three days.

Now we do have records from other civilizations of this particular supernova,
but they all come quite a bit later and they are in some cases rather oblique.
There have been, for instance, petroglyphs in New Mexico that have been
interpreted as depicting this supernova.  There is a Japanese chronicle which
also mentions it, but it was written a century and a half later.  Likewise
there is an Arabic reference, but it was written around a century later.  And
if you squint there are maybe some European texts which may have some oblique
references to this supernova.  But none of these records are as clear as the
Chinese records or contemporaneous as contemporaneous as them.

Well most of the guest stars that were observed were less spectacular than the
supernova of 1054.  They were mostly comets.  But one of the discoveries that
Chinese astronomers can claim is that they were the first to notice that the
tails of comets point away from the Sun rather than along their direction of
motion.

In addition to guest stars, another transient phenomenon that the imperial
astronomers made note of was meteors, and in particular, meteor showers.
However, in one case there is a wonderful description of a meteor impact from
Shen Kuo in the 11th century AD:

> In the 1st year of the Chih-Phing reign period (1064 AD), there was a
> tremendous noise like thunder at Chhang-chou about noon. A fiery star as big
> as the moon appeared in the south-east. In a moment there was a further
> thunderclap while the star moved to the south-west, and then with more
> thunder it fell in the garden of the Hsii family in the I-hsing district.
> Fire was seen reflected in the sky far and near, and fences in the garden
> round about were all burnt.  When they had been extinguished, a bowl-shaped
> hole was seen in the ground, with the meteorite glowing within it for a long
> time.  Even when the glow ceased it was too hot to be approached. Finally the
> earth was dug up, and a round stone as big as a fist, still hot, was found,
> with one side elongated (i.e. pear-shaped). Its colour and weight were like
> iron. The governor, Chéng Shen, sent it to the Chin Shari temple at Jun-Chou,
> where it is still kept in a box and shown to visitors.

Now, the purpose of all these observations of transient phenomena was
fundamentally astrological in nature.  The royal astronomers were looking for
omens that would be relevant to the Emperor.  But from the records we have it
appears that they applied a degree of skepticism in the preparation of their
omens as well.  There is an illuminating passage from the 14th century by the
astronomer Yang Yu about a celestial phenomenon he saw and the debate over how
to interpret it:

> When I was a Co-signatory Observer in the Bureau of Astronomy, there came a
> special imperial edict that we were to pay particular attention to celestial
> presages. On the first day of the seventh month in the sixth year of the
> Chih-Yuan reign-period (1340 AD), there came (to my house) one of the Senior
> Observers, a Mr Chang, who asked me to go to the Observatory as quickly as
> possible. When we arrived there together, we were met by Commissioner Li,
> dressed up in state apparel, who said: ‘Last night there appeared the Ching
> Hsing phenomenon. That is a very auspicious omen. I believe that it ought to
> be memorialised immediately. I suppose we shall be richly rewarded.’ So I
> looked up the files which contained the records of earlier memorials, and
> came to a very different conclusion. I said, ‘Although the phenomenon has
> occurred on the last day of the month (i.e. at the new moon), its shape was
> slightly different from what it ought to be. Besides, if the Ching Hsing
> appears, there ought to be reports coming in of wine-sweet springs,
> phoenixes, purple herbs, and felicitous clouds, in order to corroborate the
> omen). But on the contrary there are epidemics and catastrophes in Shensi,
> brigands and robbers in the central provinces, and in Fukien rebels are
> active. I am afraid it won't do. Why should the Tao of heaven be pro-
> claiming the opposite (to the Tao of earth)? 'But Mr Li was most obstinate,
> and stuck to his Opinion. So I said ‘Up to now, only the six Observers here
> have seen the phenomenon. In the unlikely possibility of its having been
> generally seen by people throughout the Country, will they not have taken it
> as an omen of evil?’ Finally he agreed to wait and see if it appeared again
> (that night), before we memorialised about it. And indeed only nine days
> later the planet Venus ‘crossed the meridian’. All this shows how careful one
> has to be not to take lightly responsibilities like these.‘

The Ching Hsing phenomenon in question in this passage is what is today called
Earthshine, when light reflected from the Earth illuminates the dark side of
the moon, usually close to the new moon.

Well, as you might expect, over the centuries Chinese astronomers also made
note of the motion of the planets.  The five classical planets were typically
known as wu pu, the five walkers, or wu wei, the five threads.  Each planet had
an astrological association with a cardinal point and an element in a system
called wuxing, which literally translates to the "five phases," or "five
agents."  This system developed out of the School of Naturalists during the
period of the Hundred Schools of Thought in the Warring States Era.  Like most
of these purported hundred schools of thought, the School of the Naturalists
was not a single cohesive philosophy, but a collection of ideas from disparate
philosophers who all had similar kinds of thoughts to each other.  But one
common feature to philosophers who fell under the School of Naturalists label
is that they took an unusual interest in the nature of matter and the physical
world.  In this way, they were somewhat similar to the Ionian school in Greece
that we discussed back in Episode 10.  But unlike the Ionian school,
philosophers in the School of Naturalists were not monists.  They instead held
that all matter was composed of five elements: earth, wood, fire, metal, and
water.  These elements were then related to each other in dynamic ways.  There
was the generating cycle, where one element would naturally generate the
production of another.  So wood feeds fire.  Fire produces earth in the form of
ash.  Earth creates metal in the form of minerals underground.  Metal produces
water in the form of condensation.  And water, in turn, allows wood to grow.
But the elements could act in destructive ways with each other as well.  Fire
melts metal.  Metal can chop wood.  Wood depletes the Earth as it grows.  Earth
obstructs the flow of water.  And water extinguishes fire.

Well each of these elements was associated with one of the planets and one of
the cardinal directions.  Mercury was associated with water and the direction
north, and was called "the Hour-star."  Venus was associated with metal and the
direction of West and was called the "Great White One."  Mars was paired with
fire, unsurprisingly, and the South and was called the "Fitful glitterer."
Jupiter got Wood and East and was called the "Year Star."  And finally Saturn
was associated with Earth and the center, and was called the "Exorcist."

These five elements first appeared in a work by a philosopher named Chou Yen,
and although the School of Naturalists even as a loose grouping disappeared
after the intellectual purges that took place during the establishment of the
Qin Dynasty, the general wuxing system persisted in Chinese thought.  These
ideas also became integrated with another system, the dualistic system of the
yin and yang.  In this system all entities have some mixture of these two
opposing but complementary natures.  Yin is a passive and receptive nature and
is associated with the feminine, and yang is the active and expansive nature
and is associated with the masculine.  In this system the Sun was yang as it
produced light that emanated out away from it and permeated the universe.  The
Moon was yin as it received the light emitted by the Sun.  As the stars shone
with their own light, they were called the "Hsiao Yang," or "lesser yang."
Now, generally the systems of wuxing and the yin and yang were most closely
associated with Taoism, but the ideas were by no means restricted to Taoist
schools of thought, and were generally important concepts in Chinese culture.

Well, the royal astronomers had a relatively fine set of gradations for the
motions of the planets as they observed them.  They kept a particular eye out
for all the major stations like a heliacal rising or a stationary point.  But
they also marked whether the planet's motion was prograde, or retrograde, which
was literally written as a "retreat."  And they would mark the speed of the
planet's motion, along with its acceleration, if it had an unexpectedly rapid
advance or if it unexpectedly slowed down.  If the planet remained at a
stationary point for more than 20 days it was called su or shou, which
literally translates to guarding the constellation it was near.

By the end of the first century AD the synodic periods of all the planets had
been measured to good accuracy, which was about 75 years ahead of records of
similar quality in the West.  Now, although the five planets had their various
astrological associations, the most important was Jupiter.  Jupiter's sidereal
period is very close to 12 years, so its period was seen as a kind of "greater
year."  This is also why it's name was, as I mentioned earlier, the
"Year-Star."  Just as there were 12 months in a year, there were 12 years in
this longer Jovian cycle.  And this is probably the origin of the famous
Chinese zodiac where each year is associated with a particular animal in a 12
year cycle.  But while Jupiter's period was important, astrologically there was
actually a more important body, called Taiyin, or the "counter-Jupiter."  The
Counter-Jupiter was an unseen celestial body that moved in the opposite
direction as Jupiter, but with the same period.  We have seen similar kinds of
hypothetical celestial bodies in other cultures.  Probably the most relevant
analogy was the Pythagorean idea of the Counter-Earth, that there was a second
Earth on the opposite side of the Central Fire which we were always facing away
from.  In Chinese astrology it was not so much the position of Jupiter that
mattered, but the position of the Counter-Jupiter.  A book called the Chi Ni
Tzu recorded some of the astrological implications of the position of the
Counter-Jupiter that developed in the 4th century BC:

> When the Taiyin is at the position of the element Metal during the first
> three years, there will be abundant harvests. When it is at Water, there will
> be damage to crops for three years. When it stands in Wood, for another three
> years, there will be prosperity; when it stands in Fire, again for three
> years, there will be drought. So some times are suitable for storing
> agricultural products while at other times rice may be given away.
> Accumulations need not be for more than three years. Deciding wisely and with
> judgment, and helped by the Tao (of Nature) one may draw on surpluses to mend
> shortages. In the first year there will be a double harvest, in the second a
> normal one, in the third a poor one.  During floods chariots should be built,
> during droughts boats should be prepared. Bumper harvests come every six
> years, and famines every twelve. Thus the sage, predicting the recurrences of
> Nature, prepares for future adversity.

Now in Chinese culture, along with other cultures of southeast Asia, the twelve
year cycle of Jupiter's sidereal period then factored into a longer cycle of 60
years, called the sexagenary cycle.  This came about because it was the length
of time to cycle through both the 12 years of the Chinese zodiac and also
through the 5 elements.  So each year was not only associated with an animal of
the Chinese zodiac, but it was also associated with one of the five elements.
In practice the elements were doubled up so that two years in a row get the
same element, but either way, it takes 60 years to come back to where you
started.  As it happens, Jupiter and Saturn also come to a conjunction nearly
every 60 years, which was another reason for the significance of this period of
time.

Now for most purposes of astrology this sexagenary cycle was sufficient.  But
as in India, astronomers later constructed even longer cycles.  One of the
foundations of these longer cycles was called the pu, which is the Callippic
cycle of 76 years that I talked about back in Episode 17.  The Callippic cycle
is special because it contains very nearly an integer number of years and
synodic months.  Incidentally, as far as we know, the Chinese never used the
less accurate Metonic cycle of 19 years in their astronomy, even though this
cycle is far more common across the globe.

20 pu was called a "sui," of 1520 years.  And then 3 sui was a shou, and 7 shou
was a chi of 31,920 years.  This corresponds to 4 Julian periods in the Western
calendar, and according to the philosophers, after this time, "all things come
to an end and return to their original state."

Now, in addition to the cycles based around the "pu," there was also a "hui,"
of 513 years, which consists of 47 lunar eclipse periods.  Unfortunately a hui
is not an even number of days, so they put together three hui to make up a
"tung" of 1539 years, which is an even number of days.  Then 3 tung, or 4617
years, had an even number of days, months, years, and eclipse periods.

There were likewise cycles based around the motions of the planets.  In
addition to the conjunctions of Jupiter and Saturn which occur every 60 years
or so, simultaneous conjunctions of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn happen every 516
years, which is very close to the length of a hui.  This may have been the
origin of the idea set out in a work called the Meng Tzu that a great sage
would appear every 500 years.  All together, the great period of the planets
was 138,240 years.  And if we combine that with the 3 tung, the great cycle of
the universe in Chinese astronomy was 23,639,040 years long.  It was generally
believed that at the beginning of the world, all the planets were in
conjunction with each other, and that when this grand conjunction recurred it
would mark the end of the world.

Well, in addition to the motions of the planets there is of course the motion
of the Moon, and Chinese astronomers naturally took a keen interest in it, too.
Now it seems that most cultures independently came to the idea that the moon
reflects the light of the Sun rather than producing its own light, but the
Chinese were relatively early to come to this conclusion.  The first claim that
the Moon's light is the reflected light of the Sun shows up in the Chou Pei
around the 4th century BC where it says: "The Sun gives to the moon her
appearance, so the moonlight shines brightly forth."  The astronomer Ching Fang
gave more extensive description in the 1st century BC:

> The moon and the planets have shape but no light. This they receive only when
> the sun illuminates them.  The former masters regarded the sun as round like
> a crossbow bullet, and they thought the moon had the nature of a mirror.
> Some of them recognized the moon as a ball too.  Those parts of the moon
> which the sun illumines look bright, those parts which it does not, remain
> dark.

It seems that from roughly the 4th century BC onwards, Chinese astronomers more
or less continuously held that the Moon reflected the light of the Sun.  Around
the 6th century AD imperial astronomers were exposed to several alternative
theories of the Moon's light from India, but these ideas never took hold.

Now, also very early on, sometime before 300 BC, Chinese astronomers measured
the motion of the Moon and found that it moves eastward by 13° every day, which
is approximately correct.   But also around this time, the astronomer Shi Shen,
whom we met in the last episode as one of the creators of the first star
catalogs in China, recognized that the motion of the moon was variable,
sometimes moving faster and sometimes slower, and that it moved north and south
of the ecliptic.  Around 10 BC a more sophisticated description of the Moon's
motion appears, called the "9 roads of the moon."  The 9 roads of the moon
effectively shows the precession of the Moon's orbit over the course of 9
years, although the real period is closer to 8 years and 10 months.

I wanted to wrap up this episode by saying a few words about the place of the
Moon and the other planets in Chinese folklore.  In Western culture we speak of
there being a "man in the moon."  In China and throughout southeast Asia they
instead speak of a rabbit in the moon.  The rabbit is seated on the left side
of the moon and is grinding medicine in a mortar and pestle.  The story of how
he got there is told in the Jakata Tales, which is a Buddhist text which
actually originates out of India but was influential throughout southeast Asia,
anywhere with a large Buddhist population.  The story goes like this: A monkey,
otter, jackal, and rabbit decided that they would all do a good deed on each
full moon.  One full moon, an old man came begging for food.  So, the monkey
gathered fruit for the man, the otter provided fish, and the jackal caught a
lizard and also gave a pot of curds.  But the rabbit only know how to graze
grass, so he offered his own flesh to be eaten and threw himself onto a fire.
Miraculously, the rabbit was not burnt.  The old man revealed himself to be
none of other than Sakra, the ruler of the Trayastrimsa heaven.  Being
impressed at the rabbit's act of charity, he drew the rabbit's image onto moon,
draped in smoke.

As for the mortar and pestle that the rabbit is seen to be using, the rabbit
was said to be the pet of Chang'e, who was the goddess of the Moon in Chinese
folklore.  As with the Greek myths that we discussed in Episode 8, there is no
canonical version of these stories, but one telling goes like this: A long time
ago, there had risen not one, but 10 suns in the sky.  The Earth became
scorched, the crops died, and the people suffered.  An archer named Hou Yi shot
down nine of the suns, leaving just the one left in the sky.  For this act he
was rewarded with two vials containing the elixir of life, one for himself and
one for his wife, Chang'e.  However, while he was out one day, his apprentice
Fengmeng broke in and demanded the elixir for himself.  Rather than give it to
Fengmeng, Chang'e swallowed the elixir in both vials herself.  She then rose
into heaven, bringing her pet rabbit with her and chose the Moon as her home.
There the rabbit can be seen preparing the elixir.

Well, the Moon is not the only celestial body with a corresponding mythology.
Taoism has the concept of a "xian," which is usually translated as "immortal."
Some of these xians were the gods of the various planets, and from time to time
they would spend some time on Earth in a human body.  One such xian is the sage
Huang Shigong, which literally translates to Yellow Rock Old Man, who was said
to be the incarnation of the god of Saturn.  As legend goes, Huang Shigong was
originally known as Wei Che and early in his life he had been a prominent court
official.  But after the rise to power of the tyrannical Qin Shi Huang, the
first emperor of the Qin dynasty, Wei Chi refused to serve in the court and
fled civilization.  He took up residence as a hermit in a cave on Mount Huang
and his original identity was forgotten and he became known to the locals
simply as the Yellow Rock Old Man, or Huang Shigong.

Well some time later, a man named Zhang Liang was passing by.  Like Huang
Shigong, Zhang Liang, too, used to be a big shot.  Zhang Liang was from a long
line of high officials in the Han State.  But Zhang Liang had the unfortunate
luck to be born in interesting times and his high status in the Han State
became a liability after the Qin State conquered them, along with the other
independent states of China at the time and established the Qin Dynasty.  Zhang
Liang expended his considerable resources fighting against his new overlords
and attempted to assassinate the Qin Emperor on several occasions.  In one of
these attempts he hired the strongest man he could find and forged him an
enormous hammer.  Zhang Liang heard that the Emperor was touring various parts
of the country and learned where his path would take him.  So Zhang Liang and
his hired muscle waited in ambush hidden up on a hill.  As the Emperor's
entourage passed by he directed his assassin to hurl the hammer at the largest
carriage pulled by the most horses in the middle of the caravan.  The assassin
hit the carriage right in the center and obliterated it, killing everyone
inside.  But to his dismay, Zhang Liang discovered that the emperor was not, in
fact, in the elaborate central carriage, but a neighboring carriage, and
survived the assassination attempt.

Zhang Liang narrowly managed to evade capture in the chaos that he had wrought,
but he was seen and became a wanted man.  So he forced to assume a false
identity and retreat to the hinterlands.  During his travels he was crossing a
bridge, and it was here that he happened upon Huang Shigong.  Huang Shigong saw
the young man, bent over, took off one of his shoes, and then threw it over the
side of the bridge into the water.  Then he said, "You, boy, go and fetch my
shoe from the water."  Zhang Liang knew that he was being trolled in some way,
but being a fugitive he couldn't afford to make any more enemies.  So he bit
his tongue, crawled down the embankment, collected the old man's shoe, and
brought it back to him.  Huang Shigong put his shoe back on, laughed at the
young man, and then walked away.  Zhang Liang stood there wondering what had
just happened to him.  But after walking some distance, Huang Shigong turned
around and returned to the Zhang Liang and told him, "I guess the boy can be
taught!  Meet me again at this bridge at dawn in five days."  Five days elapsed
and right at dawn Zhang Liang rushed onto the bridge.  But Huang Shigong was
already there and told him, "You must not be late when meeting an old man.
Come back five days later."  Another five days elapsed, and this time Zhang
Liang left well before dawn.  But when he arrived at the bridge Huang Shigong
was already standing there waiting for him.  Once again the old man told him
off for keeping an elder waiting and said to return five days later.  After
another five days Zhang Liang was determined not to be beaten, so he showed up
at the bridge at midnight.  When Huang Shigong arrived and saw Zhang Liang
already there he gave him a book that he had written on military strategy
called the Three Strategies of Huang Shigong.  Huang Shigong told the young man
to study the book and that within ten years the circumstances will be such that
he could put his knowledge to use and become an advisor to an Emperor.  And
indeed, within a decade nobles in the Han State rebelled to overthrow the Qin
Dynasty and established the Han Dynasty in its place, and for his service in
the rebellion, Zhang Liang became a trusted advisor to the new Han Emperor.

Another figure in Chinese history, Dongfang Shuo, was also said to be a xian,
usually the incarnation of the god of the planet Venus or Jupiter.  Dongfang
Shuo was a man who was notoriously tricky to pin down.  He was technically a
court scholar and official, but really seemed to behave as more of a court
jester who always managed to talk his way out of the mess that his high jinks
had gotten him into.  But he at times seemed to be a source of inexplicable
wisdom.  One story goes that he was traveling with the court of Emperor Wu,
when the entourage came upon a monster who was blocking a mountain pass.  Try
as they might, the monster could not be budged and the imperial train could not
get by.  Dongfang Shuo stood about looking around during these efforts, and
when the Emperor's bodyguards had exhausted themselves, Dongfang Shuo went up
to the monster and showered it with wine, whereupon it promptly melted away.
When asked by the Emperor how he knew to do this, Dongfang Shuo replied that
there had been a dungeon here during the tyrannical Qin dynasty, and so this
was a place of great sorrow.  This monster is the ghost of that sorrow.  But
wine dispels sorrow, and so it dispelled the monster.

Dongfang Shuo's immortal nature was revealed in another legend in which Xi
Wangmu, the mother goddess of the west visited the court of the emperor.  She
brought seven peaches of immortality, five of which she gave to the Emperor,
and two of which she ate herself.  Looking around the court, she noticed
Dongfang Shuo and asked the emperor if he was aware that the god of Jupiter was
in his court.

Well, I still have a few things to say about Chinese astronomy, but they will
have to wait until the next episode.  Next month we'll look at the place of the
hsiu, or lunar mansions, along with a couple of biographies of some of the most
important Chinese astronomers, and then we'll wrap up our tour of Chinese
astronomy by skipping ahead to the 17th century and looking at the role that
the arrival of the Jesuits in Chinese astronomy.  I hope you'll join me then.
Until the next full moon, good night and clear skies.

## Additional references

* Needham, Science and Civilisation in China, Vol. 3
