---
categories: episode
date: '2024-11-02'
description: "We turn to the astronomy of Mesoamerica, with a particular focus on\
  \ the Maya and Aztec. The central feature of their astronomy was a pair of interlocking\
  \ calendars which regulated all aspects of life. The surviving Maya manuscripts\
  \ also deal extensively with the motion of Venus, which may also have driven decisions\
  \ to go to war. We also look at the famous Aztec Sun Stone, the 2012 phenomenon,\
  \ and the fall of the Itzá Kingdom.  NOTE: The Song of Urania will be going on\
  \ hiatus and will return on the first full moon of 2026."
keywords:
- astronomy
- history
layout: episode
number: 47
title: Clock Around the Rock
---

## Transcript

Good evening, and welcome to the Song of Urania, a podcast about the history of
astronomy from antiquity to the present with new episodes every full moon,
usually.

Last month we learned how the Polynesians used astronomy to voyage across the
Pacific.  This month we will cross the Pacific ourselves and spend some time
with one of the great astronomical civilizations the ancient world has
produced: the civilizations of Mesoamerica, particularly the Maya and the
Aztec.  But, as we'll see, although the civilizations of this region are often
reduced to the Maya and the Aztec, there was a large family of similar cultures
that inhabited Mesoamerica over the millennia.

But, as always, we will start with the geography.  In modern terms, the area
we'll be focusing on in this episode is today occupied by central Mexico
through northern Guatemala.  If you start from northern Mexico and go south,
the country starts to narrow like a funnel and bend towards the east.  After
you have passed by Mexico City in central Mexico the country continues to
narrow and at some point has bent entirely to the east.  It then narrows to a
region called the Isthmus of Tehuantepec where the Gulf of Mexico to the north
is separated from the Pacific Ocean to the south by only 137 miles.  As you
move further east the land widens again, mostly due to a large peninsula that
juts out northeast into the Gulf of Mexico, called the Yucatán peninsula.

The entire region of Mesoamerica sits within the tropics, but the Isthmus of
Tehuantepec forms one of the main geographical divisions.  To the west and
north of the isthmus the geography is characterized by highlands and tends to
be arid, especially the further north and west you go.  To the east of the
isthmus the geography is characterized by lowlands and very dense jungle.

Now, ordinarily when I talk about the geography that a culture inhabited, it's
with an eye toward explaining how the geography influenced the astronomy.  But
in Mesoamerica it's a rare case where it also works the other way around.
Astronomy influenced the geography.  Sixty-six million years ago an enormous
asteroid ten kilometers in diameter impacted the Earth right off the coast of
what is now the Yucatán peninsula.  This impact, of course, had major
consequences for life on Earth.  This event is the leading theory as to why the
dinosaurs died out, which then made space for mammals to evolve into more
ecological niches, and eventually, for humans to evolve and start doing
astronomy.  But more relevant specifically to the astronomy of Mesoamerica,
this asteroid impact created a very large crater.  And, in fact, most Maya
archaeological sites sit on top of this crater.  The asteroid impact seems to
have created a large sedimentary basin, which then led to the creation of
aquifers.  Sources of water in Mesoamerica are otherwise rather scarce,
especially in the north, so the creation of these large aquifers probably
facilitated human settlement of the region.

Well, the timeline of the original human settlement of Mesoamerica is not
especially well understood.  At some point in millennia past humans crossed
over from eastern Siberia into what is now Alaska.  You may recall from Episode
45 on Aboriginal Australian astronomy that the settlement of Australia was
facilitated by the Last Glacial Maximum, or more colloquially, the Last Ice
Age.  During this period sea levels were around 110 meters lower than they are
today.  You may not be surprised to learn then that this period also
facilitated human migration into the Americas.  Instead of Siberia and Alaska
being separated by the Bering Strait, they formed a continuous landmass called
Beringia.

Now, although we more or less know when these two continents were connected,
unfortunately the timeline of human migration into the Americas is notoriously
uncertain.  There's good evidence that there was a large scale migration into
the Americas around 16,000 years ago.  But there is also some evidence, along
with a lot of arguments as to how seriously it should be believed, that there
may have also been an even earlier wave of settlement 30,000 to 40,000 years
ago.  Either way, these new populations began to expand into the Americas.
Here, again, though, there's a lot of uncertainty as to how this migration
proceeded.  One theory is that these populations first moved south along the
Pacific coast and only later began to migrate inland.  But the theory is
difficult to test because with the lower sea levels, the shoreline was much
further to the west than it is today, and any archaeological sites they would
have left would now be under about 100 meters of water.

However it happened, the later wave of migration (or only, depending on your
preferred theory) very quickly expanded throughout North and South America.
Within around two to three thousand years these populations had expanded from
Alaska to the southernmost tip of Chile.  This might sound like they were
practically sprinting across two continents, and in some sense they really
were, but it works out to be an average migration rate of just a couple of
miles per year.

At any rate, by about 14,000 years ago Mesoamerica had become populated.
Whether it was settled much earlier than that is not known.  And whether the
original settlers were the ancestors of the Maya or whether the ancestors of
the Maya displaced an earlier group is also not known.  For many millennia the
peoples of Mesoamerica were hunter gatherers, but between 8000 and 2000 BC
agriculture began to develop in the region with corn being the principal grain.
This corn, incidentally, was originally nothing like the big, fat cobs of corn
that we're used to today.  The original plant produced only a single ear of
corn that was maybe a few inches long and about as wide as your pinky finger.
Only after many centuries of selective breeding did the plant start to resemble
what we think of today when we think of corn.

Well, Maya civilization proper really shows up around 1200 BC.  Now, for
convenience, we talk about "Maya civilization," and "Mesoamerican culture," but
it wasn't a monolithic thing.  It's similar in many ways to the idea of
Mesopotamian culture.  Mesopotamian culture was made up of a variety of
cultures and states who all shared cultural and linguistic patterns.  Likewise
there were dozens of states that made up Maya civilization, and over the
centuries some of these waxed in power and then waned.  And likewise there were
cultures that were a part of Mesoamerica more broadly and shared many cultural
traits with the Maya, but didn't speak Mayan languages.  Again, these other
Mesoamerican civilizations variously waxed and waned in power over the
centuries with the Aztec becoming the most powerful by the time that the
Spanish arrived in the early 1500s.

Now, interestingly, although there were huge commonalities across the various
Mesoamerican cultures in terms of language, writing, religion, and even sport,
there did not seem to be any self-conception that they formed a unique culture
the way that, say, the Greeks did.  The Greeks also had dozens of independent
city states, and various dialects of the Greek language, but they all
recognized that they formed a cohesive culture that spoke one unique language.
Despite their mutual rivalries, the Greeks nevertheless divided the world into
the Greeks who spoke Greek, and the barbarians who spoke anything else.  But
there was no similar kind of recognition of the similarities of their cultures
among the Mesoamericans.  In this way they were again more like the
Mesopotamians, who, despite a great deal of cultural similarities with each
other, also never really subscribed to the idea that they belonged to some
common Mesopotamian identity.  In the case of the Mesoamericans this can
probably be explained by the fact that they had no barbarians around, so to
speak.  Until the arrival of the Spanish, they just had each other, so the ways
that they behaved were just the ways that humans behaved.  They was no need for
some special Mesoamerican identity to unify them.

Well, around 1200 BC the first true Mesoamerican civilization emerges, called
the Olmec, near the northern point of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec.  The Olmec
are considered to be the mother culture of Mesoamerica, because many of the
common features of Mesoamerican civilizations first appear among them, from the
agricultural crops to the artistic styles to the religion, and, importantly for
us, the calendar.  As agriculture became more sophisticated, we start to see
the transition from villages ruled by isolated chiefs, to kings, who can
exercise much more power over a much larger number of people.  With the
emergence of kings you start to see the concentration of wealth, and the kings
could then use they wealth they accumulated to commission grand monuments and
artworks to extol their grandeur.  It's in this earliest ceremonial artwork
that we see the first hints of Mesoamerican astronomy where the art draws a
connection between cosmological symbols and political power.  In this way,
early Mesoamerican art resembles the Hawaiian creation myth of the Kumulipo
that I talked about in the last episode, where the story legitimizes the king's
rule by delineating his genealogy, from recent ancestors in living memory back
through mythic heroes of yore, and then further back to the gods who created
the universe.

Well, some four or five hundred years after the earliest artifacts from the
Olmec appear, writing develops in the region, at around 800 to 700 BC.  This is
quite a remarkable thing since it's generally believed that writing
independently developed only four times in humanity's history: once among the
Babylonians, once again among the Egyptians, once among the Chinese, and once
here among the Olmec in Mesoamerica.  It's kind of interesting to note, too,
that although these writing systems all began with pictographic symbols, they
evolved into quite distinctive styles.  Although the Egyptians and
Mesoamericans both used hieroglyphs you'd never confuse one for the other.  The
Maya glyphs are written in a characteristic rectangle with rounded corners.

At any rate, to continue our brief overview of the pre-Columbian history of
Mesoamerica, it's a few centuries after writing develops that the Zapotec
civilization emerges southwest of the Olmec in the Valley of Oaxaca.  The
Zapotecs were a relatively militaristic culture and many of their relief
carvings depict their military victories and the various ways in which they
would torture their captives.  Now, the Zapotec civilization actually survived
all the way until the arrival of Hernán Cortés, but it came to be eclipsed by
other Mesoamerican civilizations after a few centuries, between 100 BC and 200
AD.  By the 1100 AD or so it underwent a political decay and ultimately ended
up getting folded into the Aztec empire.  And this kind of story is fairly
common in the region.

One of the features of Mesoamerican history is that there really isn't much in
the way of a single empire that arises and conquers everyone else in the
region, at least until you get to the Aztec.  Instead you have kingdoms in
various corners of the region that at various times grow in power, maybe expand
somewhat and conquer some of their neighbors, shift the center of gravity of
cultural development, but then over time become less powerful and shrink.

The first period of Maya civilization, called the preclassic period has this
happen with the Olmec and then the Zapotec.  But from 200 AD until 900 we enter
into the Classic period of Maya civilization.  During this period many more
kingdoms wax and wane across the region.  The most important of these was in
many ways the most mysterious, a city-state called Teotihuacan.  Teotihuacan
was located just to the northeast of modern day Mexico City, so it was actually
a fair ways away from the Olmec in the cradle of Mesoamerican civilization at
the Isthmus of Tehuantepec.  Teotihuacan emerges around 100 BC and underwent
some three centuries of construction.  The city that its people built was
simply massive.  From its founding until 600 AD it was the largest city in all
of the Americas, and towards the end of this period it was among the largest
cities in the entire world with a population of around 200,000.  Teotihuacan
was evidently highly organized.  The whole city was built on a regular grid of
streets and there was a main avenue about a mile long which ended in two
massive pyramids, today called the Pyramids of the Sun and the Moon.  At the
time they were constructed these pyramids were one of the largest structures in
the world.  In addition to just being an impressive city on its own terms,
Teotihuacan also seems to have been hugely important to Mesoamerica more
broadly.  It had a large trade network across the entire region and seems to
have culturally influenced the rest of Mesoamerica.

But despite its importance really very little is known at all about
Teotihuacan.  We don't even really know the basics like who its rulers were,
what its social structure looked like, or even what language they spoke.  I
mentioned that the two massive pyramids they constructed are today called the
Pyramids of the Sun and Moon, but they're just called that because we don't
know what they were originally called.  Teotihuacan seems to have made some
excursions to the east to try to conquer the Maya in the 4th and 5th centuries,
but these invasions went poorly.  By 500--600 AD Teotihuacan went into decline.
It seems this happened the same way that Hemingway described going broke, first
gradually, then suddenly.  Towards the end the city was essentially abandoned,
and its residents scattered across Mesoamerica.  Centuries later the area was
occupied by the Aztec who, rather like medieval Romans or Greeks, were somewhat
in awe of this great ancient civilization whose ruins they occupied.  Given how
little we know about Teotihuacan at its peak it will perhaps be no surprise to
you that we also don't really know what caused its collapse.

Over to the east on the Yucatán peninsula, the Maya also saw something of a
golden age during the Classic period.  There were various shifts in regional
power centers over the years, but the period from 200 to 800 AD sees a huge
amount of ceremonial monuments and art built.  This Maya golden age lasted a
little while longer than Teotihuacan did, but it, too, eventually saw a
collapse in the 9th century.  It's thought that this collapse may have been
driven by population growth which led to disease and popular uprisings, and
which then led to the kingdoms becoming unstable and vulnerable to invasion.

After these collapses we then enter into what's called the Postclassic period,
which lasts from 900 AD until the arrival of the Spanish in 1519.  The
Postclassic period is really dominated by the rise of the Aztec Empire.  Like
the Romans, the prehistory of the Aztecs is more myth than anything else, but
the traditional account goes that they began as a nomadic group, usually called
the "Mexica," in western Mexico.  During their years of wandering the god
Huitzilopochtli told the people to look for an eagle sitting atop a cactus
eating a snake.  Sure enough, near Lake Texcoco they saw the sign and founded
the city of Tenochtitlan, a few dozen miles southwest of the ruins of
Teotihuacan.

The Aztec were a rather minor power after the founding of Tenochtitlan, but
around the middle of the 15th century they began to expand explosively under
Motecuzoma I, whose name is usually Anglicized to Montezuma I.  By the arrival
of the Spanish 75 years years later the Aztecs had expanded to rule nearly all
of modern day Mexico.  To achieve this explosive expansion, the Aztecs were
remarkably brutal, and this won them little love among their vanquished
neighbors.  One of the major reasons why Cortés's force of only 200 Spaniards
managed to conquer the largest empire the Americas had ever seen was that they
weren't doing it on their own.  They had legions of disaffected vassal kingdoms
ready to line up and do whatever they could to bring down the Aztecs.

So that is a quick overview of the history of Mesoamerica, at least the
pre-Columbian history.  Three periods, preclassical, classical, and
post-classical.  The foundations of Mesoamerican culture really get set during
the preclassical period, and then there is a huge elaboration and refinement of
culture during the classical period.  There's less cultural development during
the postclassical period, but as I'll talk about more, we happen to know quite
a bit more about this era.

So before we really get into the astronomy specifically, it's worth asking how
we know what we know about Mesoamerican astronomy and its history more
generally.  Like everything else in Mesoamerican history, our sources can be
divided into two categories: pre-Columbian, and post-Columbian.  The
post-Columbian sources are much more numerous and much more accessible, but
they have the limitation that the vast majority of them were written by the
Spanish, largely Spanish clerics.  So their contents are necessarily filtered
through a European and Catholic worldview.  Ironically, one of the most
important sources we have for Aztec culture is also the reason we have so
little source material in the original Mayan languages.  A Franciscan friar
named Diego de Landa arrived on the Yucatán peninsula in 1549 with the purpose
of converting the Maya to Catholicism.  He engaged in his missionary work with
gusto, resolving to walk the entirety of the peninsula and bring the faith to
even the most remote village.  Although there was understandably a huge amount
of anti-Spanish sentiment among the Maya he was fearless in preaching to even
hostile audiences.  There is a story of Landa stumbling upon a group of
hundreds of Maya about to ritually sacrifice a boy.  Landa pushed his way
through the crowd, released the boy, smashed their stone idols, and began to
preach to them the error of their ways.  And, at least in this account, the
crowd was so astonished by him that they asked him to stay with them longer and
teach them more.  Well, through this missionary work among the Maya people,
Landa began to gain their trust, and eventually he became privy to some of the
more secret aspects of the Maya religion, most importantly the Maya codices.

The Maya had a practice of writing what are more or less books.  They used a
kind of paper made out of pounded tree bark.  This was then folded like an
accordion to make pages, and these pages were bound between two covers.  Well,
after being in Yucatán for over a decade, Landa began to realize that many of
the supposed converts to Catholicism were still practicing their native
religion, worshipping idols, and even in some cases, performing human
sacrifices.  Landa's response to this was to order an Inquisition to root out
any Maya whose hearts had not truly converted to the Catholic faith.  At the
culmination of this Inquisition, Landa collected 27 Maya codices, and possibly
many more in some tellings, which he asserted contained nothing but devil
worship and superstition, and he burned them all.

Now, Landa's burning of all the Maya codices that he could get his hands on was
actually quite controversial at the time.  Many of his fellow clergymen were
aghast at this book burning and felt that by better understanding the Maya
religion they would be better equipped to convert the Maya.  And, in fact, when
news got back to Spain, Landa was ordered to return home and stand trial for
his actions.  Although he had been put in charge of the missionary efforts on
the Yucatán peninsula, he was still just a simple friar and didn't have the
authority to order an Inquisition --- this power was reserved for bishops.  In
the end a tribunal acquitted him of his crimes, and a few years later when the
previous bishop of Yucatán died, Landa was promoted to the rank of bishop.  But
during his time back in Spain, Landa put pen to paper and detailed everything
he had learned about Maya language, religion, and culture during his time among
the Maya people.  The resulting text, called Relación de las Cosas de Yucatán,
is by far the most detailed and comprehensive account of Maya civilization at
the time of European contact.  The Mayanist William Gates wrote, "ninety-nine
percent of what we today know of the Mayas, we know as the result either of
what Landa has told us in [his work], or have learned in the use and study of
what he told."

Well, despite Landa's best efforts to the contrary, four Maya codices escaped
his destruction.  Three of these are essentially complete, and are called the
Dresden, Madrid, and Paris codices, named for the cities in which they are
today located.  There is a fourth, more fragmentary codex that was once called
the Grolier codex because it was first shown publicly at an exhibition at the
Grolier club in New York.  Today because it is stored in Mexico City it is
known as the Maya Codex of Mexico.  Of these four codices the most important
for Maya astronomy is the Dresden codex, although all four have some
astronomical contents.  The provenance of the Dresden codex is somewhat murky.
It first appears in the historical record when it shows up in a private
collection in Vienna in 1739.  How it made its way from the Yucatán peninsula
to Europe and escaped Landa's purge is completely unknown.  It's speculated
that it may have been sent to Spain by Cortés himself as part of the so-called
Royal Fifth.  The Royal Fifth originated in Muslim kingdoms but was later
adopted by the Spanish and Portuguese.  They idea was that any booty that was
taken during war or conquest was taxed by the monarch at 20%.  So 20% of
anything that the Conquistadors took, they had to send to the Spanish king.
King Charles I of Spain also happened to be the Holy Roman Emperor, whose
capital was Vienna.  So it's thought that maybe this is how the codex ended up
in Vienna.  At any rate, in 1739, it came to the attention of a director of the
Royal Library, who purchased it for his own personal use from this anonymous
private collection.  Some time later, he donated the codex to the Royal Library
in Dresden.  At this point the Dresden Codex sat completely ignored for about
150 years.  In 1880, a librarian named Ernst Förstemann stumbled across it
while he was going about his routine archival work.  Förstemann became obsessed
with the strange Maya hieroglyphs and began to spend all of his spare time
trying to decipher them.  He kept the book in his desk drawer and would pull it
out and study it anytime he had a bit of free time.  Using Landa's treatise as
a guide, he noticed that there were patterns in the text that matched the Maya
calendar and numbers kept showing up that were important in Maya numerology.
Unfortunately, the Dresden codex suffered significant water damage during the
firebombing of Dresden during WWII, but thanks to Förstemann's work to
publicize the text, by that point detailed photographs had been made of the
artifact.

Well, the other major figure in the early work deciphering Maya hieroglyphs was
an American named Joseph Goodman who a relatively unusual background.  When he
came of age in 1856, he moved with his father from New York to San Francisco.
Within a couple of years, though, the Comstock lode was discovered in Nevada,
setting off the Silver Rush, and Goodman moved to Nevada to be closer to the
action.  There he bought out a small local newspaper called the Territorial
Enterprise and grew it into one of the most important western newspapers of the
day.  In 1872, Goodman used his newspaper to oppose the candidacy of William
Sharon to the US Senate, who was one of the most richest and most powerful men
in the West.  Thanks in no small part to the relentless criticism of Sharon in
the pages of the Territorial Enterprise, William Sharon lost his election bid.
So, when the next senate election came up in 1874, Sharon decided he did not
want this particular thorn in his side, so he bought out Goodman's share in the
newspaper for a hefty sum.

With a lot of money in his pocket now, Goodman moved back to California and
started to pursue a passion of his for archaeology.  He came across the
descriptions and photographs of Maya ruins taken by the explorer Alfred
Maudslay and set about trying to decipher the hieroglyphs.  As with Förstemann
over in Germany, Goodman's big breakthrough came about when he discovered
Landa's detailed treatise on Maya culture.  With that, he was able to
independently reconstruct various aspects of the Maya calendar and numbering
system.

Well, after these early breakthroughs, much of the next half century of Maya
research was focused on deciphering dates and chronologies.  Some
archaeologists even went so far as to assert that there was nothing to Maya
writing except dates and astronomy.  One Mayanist, Sylvanus Morley, wrote in
1922, 

> No grandiloquent record of earthly glory these. No bombastic chronicles of
> kingly pomp and pageantry, like most of the Assyrian, Babylonian, and
> Egyptian inscriptions. On the contrary, the Maya priests would seem to have
> been concerned with more substantial matters, such as the observation and
> record of astronomical phenomena.

Well, this turned out to be a quintessential example of selection bias.  All
the Maya writing seemed to be about dates and astronomy, because those kinds of
numerical glyphs were basically the only things that had been deciphered.  The
next major breakthrough came in 1960, from a Russian-American Mayanist at the
Peabody Museum named Tatiana Proskouriakoff.  The Peabody Museum had a
collection of 40 Maya stelae with inscriptions on them, and Proskouriakoff
noticed that these stelae could be grouped into seven sets or series.  In each
series, they began with a glyph of a man dressed in fine clothes, sitting atop
a throne.  This initial glyph would then be followed by other men in fine
clothes conducting rituals or warriors standing over their conquered enemies.
These glyphs would be accompanied by dates.  She noticed that the dates on
these monuments all spanned a few decades.  The first date was accompanied by a
particular action glyph, and the last date was also accompanied by an action
glyph.  Proskouriakoff's realization was that these series must have been
describing the life and accomplishments of a king.  The first date given was,
of course, none other than the date of the king's birth, which implied that the
first action glyph that accompanied this date meant "birth."  The second action
glyph she interpreted as a coronation.  This was the first time anyone had
managed to decipher a non-numerical or astronomical glyph.

Another major breakthrough had happened a few years earlier, although it took
longer to trickle into the broader community of Mayanists.  A Soviet
philologist named Yuri Knorosov argued that Maya hieroglyphs were not
logographs, representing entire words, but were actually syllabic, and that the
glyphs actually represented phonetic sounds.  Incidentally, there's a story
which is almost certainly apocryphal that Knorosov's interest in Maya
hieroglyphs came about during WWII.  Supposedly, Knorosov was part of the
Soviet invasion of Berlin, and during this invasion the National Library was
set on fire.  Knorosov rushed into the library, grabbed a handful of books, and
one of them turned out to be a rare reproduction of the Dresden, Paris, and
Madrid codices.

Well, however he got interested in Maya studies, Knorosov's insight, that Maya
hieroglyphs are largely phonetic turned out to be essentially correct.
Unfortunately it was roundly panned in the West after he published it.  His
results were dressed up in Soviet jargon and were trumpeted by the Soviet
propagandists as being a victory of Marxist-Leninist methods.  At the height of
the cold war, this kind of language didn't go over well in western circles.  It
wasn't until the mid-1970s that Western scholars gave his ideas another look
and started to come around to them.

One of the reasons that Knorosov's idea was not immediately obvious is that
there was a huge amount of variation in the way that scribes would notate
particular glyphs.  A single underlying glyph might be drawn dozens of
different ways, depending on how much elaboration a particular scribe wanted to
make on some particular glyph.  Once it was realized that these dozens of
apparently distinct glyphs actually represented the same phonetic cluster, the
hieroglyphs were fairly rapidly deciphered.  By the early 2000s the vast
majority of Maya writing had been deciphered and was understood.

Well, in addition to the post-Columbian Spanish texts about Mesoamerica and the
various Maya and Aztec writings themselves, another important source is a
post-Columbian Maya text called the Books of Chilam Balam.  Unlike the earlier
Maya texts, the Books of Chilam Balam were written long after knowledge of Maya
hieroglyphs had been lost, so although the texts are written in native Mayan
languages, they were almost entirely notated using the Latin alphabet.
Incidentally, as a bit of a pedantic aside, if you are wondering why I
sometimes say Maya and other times say Mayan, the general usage is that the
adjective Mayan applies only to the language.  Otherwise, we speak of the Maya
people, Maya culture, Maya astronomy, and so forth.  At any rate, the Books of
Chilam Balam are named after a Maya prophet.  The words "Chilam Balam"
literally translate to "Prophet Jaguar," and the name Balam for jaguar was a
common family name.  Whether this figure really existed or was purely legendary
is a matter of debate, but if he did exist, traditional legends say that he
lived during the end of the 15th century and put him in the area of Maní in the
southwest of the Yucatán peninsula, as it happens, the same site as Bishop
Landa's book burning.  Chilam Balam had a similar kind of reputation as
Nostradamus in Europe.  According to tradition Chilam Balam predicted that
strangers would come from the east bearing a new religion.  Thanks to this
reputation, over the centuries various texts were attributed to this famous
seer and they came to be collected into the Books of Chilam Balam.

The real authors of the Books of Chilam Balam would have been other chilams in
Maya society.  A chilam was an important role, and any Maya village worth its
salt would have one.  The chilam was not so inaccessible as a high priest.
They lived among the people and worked closely with them, acting as a
combination of fortune teller, counsellor, and doctor.  To receive his
prophecies, a chilam would lie flat on the floor of his house and listen for a
god or a spirit to speak to him from a roof beam.  It's hypothesized that this
practice may have involved interpreting bird songs, since the words for "bird"
and "omen" are homophones in Mayan languages.  At any rate, the Books of Chilam
Balam contain prophecy, history, astronomy, chronography, and medicine.  The
contents were probably mostly written between the 16th and 17th centuries, but
the underlying concepts were generally pre-Columbian.

Okay, well I've been talking at some length now about the broader history and
how we know what we know, but what is it, exactly, that we know about
Mesoamerican astronomy?  Well, the place we'll start is with the calendar,
since the calendar was the central feature of Mesoamerican astronomy, and also,
maybe not coincidentally, the feature for which we have by far the most
documentary evidence.  The main features of this calendar appear throughout all
of Mesoamerica, from the Maya on the Yucatán peninsula to the Aztec all the way
in the northwest.  The calendar consisted of two principal cycles: a solar
cycle of 365 days, and a ritual cycle of 260 days.  In addition to these two
primary cycles, the Mesoamericans also kept track of a third cycle, the cycle
of Venus, which I'll go into in more detail in a bit.

The main use of the solar cycle was to organize civil affairs.  The solar cycle
of 365 days was broken into 18 months of 20 days apiece with an extra five
epagomenal days that existed outside of any month.  These five extra days were
considered to be particularly dangerous since the barriers between the mortal
realm and the realm of the spirits broke down.  To ward off evil during these
days the Maya would not leave their homes and would engage in various rituals.

Now, you'll notice that the length of this solar cycle is 365 days, but the
true length of the year is more like 365 and a quarter days.  Most calendars
address this issue by periodically adding in some kind of a leap day, but for
whatever reason the Mesoamericans never bothered with this.  It is clear from
their texts that they were aware of a more precise length of the year, but they
evidently didn't have any need to incorporate that extra precision into the
civil calendar.  Consequently the solar cycle slowly drifts throughout the
year, by about 25 days over the course of a century.  In this way the
Mesoamericans were similar to the Egyptians, who also adopted a fixed 365 day
cycle.  Incidentally, you may have noticed that there are a number of parallels
between the Egyptians and the Mesoamericans.  Both had this regular 365 day
cycle in their calendar, they used an even division of months, they had five
extra days in the year which were considered to be unlucky in both cultures.
They both wrote with a phonetic hieroglyphic script, they both built giant
pyramids.  These connections are almost certainly coincidences, but they have
led to no shortage of enthusiasts claiming that the Egyptians must have
traversed the Atlantic and brought their culture to Mesoamerica.  Or, even more
radically, that the Egyptians and Mesoamericans must have obtained their
culture from a common source --- aliens.  These ideas are actually part of a
very long tradition of speculation that the Mesoamericans recently came from
Mesopotamia or Egypt and brought the culture of those regions with them.  When
the Spanish arrived in Mesoamerica and discovered that it was peopled, one line
of thought was that the Mesoamericans were, in fact, Jewish, and were the lost
tribes of Israel.  It was well known to them from the Old Testament that there
had originally been twelve tribes of Israel, but after they were conquered by
the Neo-Assyrian Empire, nine of these tribes were scattered and lost, leaving
only the tribes of Judah, Benjamin, and the priestly tribe of Levi.  When news
returned to Europe that the Americas were peopled, a going theory for many
centuries were that these peoples must have been none other than these
scattered tribes of Israel.  Anyway, this is not the last I have to say about
the more, shall we say, speculative ideas regarding the Maya.

Well, the basic structure of the solar cycle was shared throughout all of
Mesoamerica, but the names of the months varied quite a bit regionally.  Each
kingdom generally had its own unique names for the months, and there wasn't all
that much commonality even between neighboring kingdoms.  By contrast, the
other major cycle, the 260 day ritual cycle, was much more consistent
geographically.  The Maya all essentially used the same terminology, and the
Aztec also all essentially used the same terminology, and there were a lot of
similarities between the two after you account for differences in language.

The ritual cycle consisted of 20 day names with 13 numbers apiece, but these
names and numbers cycled simultaneously.  It's perhaps easiest to explain by
making it explicit, the first day name in the Maya calendar was Imix which
means "crocodile."  The second day name was "Ik" which is usually translated as
"wind."  The third is "akbal" which is usually translated to "night-house" but
also means darkness.  So, you might think that the way that the calendar would
go is that you would have the first of Crocodile, followed by the second of
Crocodile, and so forth until you got to the 13th of Crocodile, and then you'd
have the first of Wind, second of Wind, and so forth.  But the numbers and
names cycled simultaneously, so it would really be the first of Crocodile,
followed by the Second of Wind, followed by the Third of Night-House, and so
forth.  Because the numbers 13 and 20 are relatively prime, you would hit every
combination of number and name exactly once in a 260 day period.

If the solar cycle was mostly used for regulating civil affairs, the 260 day
ritual cycle was mostly used for divination and, well, ritual.  Each day and
number in the cycle had its own character, some propitious, others ominous.  In
the Aztec language, Nahuatl, this cycle was called the "tonalpohualli," which
is usually translated to "the counting of days," but the word "tonalli,"
literally means the Sun's heat, which, by extension also represented a person's
life force.  A person's fortunes would be read by a "tonalpouhque," who
occupied the same sort of role in Aztec society that the Chilam did in Maya
society that I talked about earlier.  Incidentally, the divination that a
tonalpouhque did was distinguished from what was called "nagualism," which was
more akin to sorcery and witchcraft.  Nagualism was practiced in secret and was
associated with malevolent forces.  The friar Bernardino de Sahagún wrote
about them,

> The soothsayer, the reader of day signs ... is a wise man, an owner of books
> [and] of writings. The good soothsayer [is] one who reads the day signs for
> one; who examines, who remembers [their meaning]. He reads the day signs; he
> brings them to one’s attention.  The bad [soothsayer] is a deceiver, a
> mocker, a false speaker, a hypocrite—a diabolical, a scandalous speaker. He
> disturbs, confounds, beguiles, deceives others.

Well, as with European astrology, the most important determinant of an
individual's future was the day on which they were born.  After birth, a child
would be ritually bathed and assigned to his day sign.  Usually this ritual
bath was conducted immediately after the child's birth.  But if the child
happened to be born on a particularly unlucky day, the priest might tarry a day
or two to give the child a more propitious day.  Priests had the latitude to
delay the ceremony as long as it fell within the same 13-day week that the
child had been born in.  An example of the significance of a day sign was
recorded by Sahagún, whom we heard from just a moment ago.  He wrote,

> The man born upon [the day sign of One Flower], they said, and it was
> averred, would be happy, quite able, and much given to song and joy: a
> jester, an entertainer.  And it was said that women were great embroiderers.
> It was said that this sign was indifferent; that is to say, a little bad and
> a little good.

But the significance of the ritual calendar went well beyond divining an
individual's personality.  It regulated all aspects of life.  The friar Diego
Durán once recounted how it had determined the appropriate date of the harvest.
He wrote,

> I dare to swear to these things because in church I myself have heard the
> public pronouncement, all the people being present, that the time of the
> harvest had come. They all rush[ed] off to the fields with such haste that
> neither young nor old remain[ed] behind. They could have gathered the crop
> earlier, at their leisure; but since the old sorcerer found in his book or
> almanac that the day had come, he proclaimed it to the people, and they went
> off in great speed.

Fray Diego Durán went on to describe the wide variety of ways that the ritual
calendar specified what they would do and when.

> The characters [for the days] also taught the Indian nations the days on
> which they were to sow, reap, till the land, cultivate corn, weed, harvest,
> store, shell the ears of corn, sow beans and flaxseed.... [T]hese signs were
> common not only in agriculture but also in trade and commerce, in buying and
> selling, in marriage, and in bathing. The same was the case in the eating of
> certain foods; except on specified days and times certain foodstuffs could
> not be eaten. I believe this superstition to be difficult to uproot, and I
> fear that in certain places these ancient rules and rites have not
> disappeared. I see that they are still kept strictly, and I base my opinion
> upon the fact that one day I asked an old man why he was sowing a certain
> type of small bean so late in the year, considering that they are usually
> frostbitten at that time. He answered that everything has a count, a reason,
> and a special day.

Fray Durán's intuition that the ritual calendar would be difficult to uproot
turned out to be quite correct.  Although the Catholic Church discouraged its
use, it persisted for centuries after the Conquest.  In fact, in the late
1800s, when Ernst Förstemann and Joseph Goodman were piecing together the
mechanics of the ritual calendar in the late 1800s, they were under the
impression that its use had long since died out.  But during some ethnographic
investigations into rural parts of Yucatán in the 1920s it was discovered that
the ritual calendar was alive and well.  Two anthropologists, Oliver La Farge
and Frans Blom found that many different remote communities still used this
traditional calendar, and, what's more, their dates all agreed with each other.
Its use even survived the Guatemalan Civil war in the mid 20th century during
which the Guatemalan government perpetrated a genocide on the indigenous Maya
and attempted to suppress their culture as best they could.

Well, the basic structure of the ritual calendar as a continuous cycle of 260
days is straightforward enough.  But the motivation behind it is rather more
mysterious.  It's really quite unique in the history of human civilizations.
Pretty much every culture has recognized concepts like a year and a month, and
most have some sort of week that is intermediate between a month and a day.
But there's no obvious motivation for a 260 day cycle.  So why the
Mesoamericans developed this 260 day cycle and put so much significance in it
is still an open question.  But, of course, that's not for a lack of ideas.
Scholars have noted that 260 days is roughly the length of a pregnancy.  But
apart from the fact that the durations match, there's not really any other
evidence that this was the motivation.  That being said, if you ask modern Maya
daykeepers in rural Yucatán why the ritual calendar is 260 days long, some have
given the gestation period of a baby as a reason.  But it's unlikely that the
original motivation for the ritual calendar survived nearly three millennia
from its origin.

Another hypothesis is more astronomical in nature.  Mesoamerica falls entirely
within the tropics, and this means that at two points during the year the Sun
passes directly overhead, through the zenith.  This is actually a rather
noticeable phenomenon, because objects appear to cast no shadow.  And these two
days when the sun made its zenith passage had special ritual significance.
Well, in the cradle of Mesoamerican civilization, where the Olmec emerged, the
two dates of the zenith passage are at the beginning of May and again in early
August.  These two dates are 105 days apart.  This means that after the time
from the second zenith passage in August back to the first zenith passage of
the following year is 260 days.

A third hypothesis is that the 260 days of the ritual calendar derived purely
from numerology.  260 is the product of 20 and 13.  The number 20 was important
because it formed the base of the Mesoamerican numbering system and also was
the number of digits on the human body.  The number 20 was therefore associated
with humanity generally.  As we'll see in a bit more detail later, the number
13 was associated with the cosmos.  The product of these two numbers to form
the 260 day ritual cycle could then be viewed as an interlocking of the human
with the cosmic.  And of course, there's no reason that the Maya needed to have
just one reason to develop this cycle.  It's possible that they recognized that
this 260 day period had a variety of connections, from the length of pregnancy,
to the astronomical, to the numerological, and these different motivations all
reinforced each other to impress upon the early Maya the significance of this
cycle.

Well, given the 365 day solar cycle and the 260 day ritual cycle, this meant
that every day actually had two names associated with it, and when writing
dates, both names were typically given.  If you do a bit of math, you can work
out that if you take these two dates together, this combined cycle will repeat
itself every 52 years.  This 52 year period is generally referred to as the
"calendar round."

The transition from one of these 52 year periods to the next was a major event
and was accompanied by solemn rituals.  Among the Aztec, this event was
associated with the Pleiades.  The Pleiades had special significance all
throughout Mesoamerica, and the period where it disappeared behind the Sun and
then emerged 40 days later at its heliacal rising was closely tracked.  I
mentioned a moment ago how in Mesoamerica the Sun would pass through the zenith
in the month of May.  This was an important event during the year, but the
point opposite it in the year, six months later, was also significant.  At this
time, in late November for the Aztec, the Pleiades would transit the meridian
at midnight.  Since this was half a year away from the zenith transit of the
Sun, this time of the year was considered to be the nadir of the Sun.

Well, every 52 years, when a Calendar Round ended, the Aztecs would mark this
transition at this time of the year when the Pleiades transited at midnight and
the sun was at its nadir.  Incidentally, you might think that the new Calendar
Round would start on a date like the First of Crocodile, since Crocodile is
generally listed as the first month of the ritual cycle.  But in fact, for
numerological reasons, the new cycle began on the second of Reed, Reed being
the 13th month in the cycle.  And this won't be the last time that the number
13 crops up.  This is the date in Aztec mythology on which the heavens were
created and the god Tezcatlipoca, the god of the night sky, was born.

Well, on this date in late November every 52 years, the Aztec would mark the
occasion by performing the New Fire ritual.  The friar Sahagún described it
like this:

> First they put out fires everywhere in the country round ... And when it came
> to pass that night fell, all were frightened and filled with dread.  Thus was
> it said: it was claimed that if fire could not be drawn, then [the Sun] would
> be destroyed forever; all would be ended; there would evermore be night.
> Nevermore would the Sun come forth.

In the five days leading up to the ceremony, the people would fast, refrain
from speaking, and throw out clothes, cooking vessels, idols, jars, and other
household items that would tie them to the past Calendar Round.  Then, on the
day of the ceremony, the Aztec emperor would ascend the mountain Huixachtlan,
accompanied by the high priests.  There, the priests tied a prisoner to a rock
and cut out his heart.  In his open chest cavity they placed kindling, and then
used a pair of sticks to ignite the kindling in the man's chest.  This fire
drill was symbolic of the Pleiades overhead, which had the name "fire drill" in
Nahuatl.  Once this new fire had been lit, it would be carried down the
mountain to light great bonfires throughout Tenochtitlan.  This signaled to the
people that they had safely made the transition from the old Calendar Round
into the new.

Well, in addition to the solar cycle and the ritual cycle, Mesoamericans also
tracked the cycle of Venus.  In fact, much of the astronomical content of the
Dresden codex consists of tables of Venus's motion.  This cycle lasted for 584
days, which is the synodic period of Venus.  Over the course of two Calendar
Rounds, the Venus cycle would reset with respect to the solar and ritual
cycles.  Within the cycle, Mesoamerican astronomers tracked four stages of
Venus's motion: its time when it was visible as a morning star, when it was
invisible at superior conjunction, that is to say, when it was behind the Sun,
when it was an evening star, and then when it was invisible at inferior
conjunction, that's to say when it was in front of the Sun.  Now, one of the
interesting features of the Venus cycle as it is described in the Dresden codex
is that the periods given for these four intervals are rather stylized.  The
overall duration of 584 days for Venus's synodic period is correct.  And
actually, Venus's synodic period varies somewhat from one year to the next due
to the eccentricity of its orbit and the Earth's.  So the Maya had to have
measured many cycles to correctly determine the mean synodic period.  But the
way that they broke it into intermediate lengths of time is actually rather far
off from the true values.  They listed its time as a morning star as 236 days
when really it's more like 263, nearly a month off.  And the time at superior
conjunction was listed at 90 days when really it's more like 50.  It seems that
the Maya rounded off these two periods to the nearest whole number of lunar
months, possibly to help it better conform to their ritual cycles.

There is also some archaeological evidence of Maya observations of Venus.  The
ruins at Chichen Itza contain a building called El Caracol, or the Snail
because of a rounded dome that looks remarkably like a modern observatory dome.
Windows in this building are aligned towards the position of Venus at maximum
elongation.  At another site, Copán, one of the buildings has the symbol for
Venus inscribed on it.  One of the windows in this temple is aligned such that
Venus is visible over a roughly two week period at the end of April and
beginning of May, when the dry season ends and the rainy season begins, right
before the Sun's zenith passage.

Well, Venus was the most important planet for Maya astronomy, and I'll have
more to say about it in a bit, but there is a similar table of the motion of
Mars as well in the Dresden codex and a partial version of the Mars tables also
appears in the Madrid codex.  The table gives the synodic period of Mars as 780
days, which is also correct, and, incidentally, corresponds to exactly 3 ritual
cycles.

In addition to these planets, Mesoamericans, of course, closely tracked the
motion of the Sun.  But before I get into Mesoamerican conceptions of the Sun I
need to talk a little bit about their cosmogony.  Mesoamerican stories about
the creation of the universe varied across the region but they had a few common
elements.  One of the most important sources we have for Maya accounts of the
creation is in a post-Columbian text from the early 18th century called the
Popol Vuh, which literally translates to Book of the Mat, but is typically
translated as something like the Community Book, since the Mat in question was
a kind of throne that the king of the K'iche' people sat upon and which
represented the community as a whole.  As in many accounts of the cosmogony
across the world, it begins with a description of the darkness and emptiness at
the beginning of time.

> This is the account of when all is still silent and placid. All is silent and
> calm. Hushed and empty is the womb of the sky.  These, then, are the first
> words, the first speech. There is not yet one person, one animal, bird, fish,
> crab, tree, rock, hollow, canyon, meadow or forest. All alone the sky exists.
> The face of the earth has not yet appeared.  Alone lies the expanse of the
> sea, along with the womb of all the sky. There is not yet anything gathered
> together. All is at rest. Nothing stirs. All is languid, at rest in the sky.
> There is not yet anything standing erect. Only the expanse of the water, only
> the tranquil sea lies alone. There is not anything that might exist. All lies
> placid and silent in the darkness, in the night.

Then, two gods, called the Framer and the Shaper appear before the creator god,
called the Heart of the Sky.  The structure of the various Mesoamerican
cosmogonies then tell of how over a long period of time the gods attempt to
create man, but each time their efforts are found wanting because their
creations cannot properly worship the gods.  They first created animals, but
they found that the animals did not know how to worship the gods.  Next, they
created men out of mud, but the men fell apart in the water.  Then, the Framer
and Shaper gods performed a ritual over 260 days using grains of corn.  After
completing the ritual, they carved men out of wood.  But they found that these
men had no mind.  In the words of the Popol Vuh, "They walked without purpose,
were merely an experiment, an attempt at people."  So, the gods destroyed these
wooden men, but some of them escaped and continue to live on as spider monkeys.
Now, at this point in the text there is a significant digression involving a
pair of twins, but once the narrative returns to the creation of man, the gods
try one last time and create man from corn.  Here, they are at long last
successful.  The men worship the gods and they are made to be mortal so that
they remain faithful to the gods.  Later on, the gods give the men wives to
make them happy.  This story lays out a kind of contract that mankind has
entered into with the gods.  The purpose of man was to worship the gods, and if
they did so, the gods, in turn, would sustain mankind.

Well, in addition to a similar kind of account of the creation of man, the
Aztec also had a belief that the universe had previously gone through four
cycles of creation and destruction, and that they were living in the fifth and
final cycle.  In each age, a god associated with one of the cardinal directions
is chosen to become the Sun and provide warmth and nourishment to the Earth.
But each time, something goes wrong and leads to the destruction of the world.
In the age of the First Sun, the god Tezcatlipoca was chosen, but he was the
god of the north, which was associated with the color black.  Consequently, he
could not provide enough illumination for the world.  Eventually another god
knocked him out of the sky and jaguars ate all the people.  This age was known
as the Jaguar Sun.  Then came the Wind Sun.  But the people lost their faith,
became preoccupied with wealth, and failed to conduct the appropriate rituals.
Consequently a great hurricane was sent to destroy the Earth.  The third sun
was the Rain Sun.  In this age the Sun god was tricked by Tezcatlipoca, and in
his grief withheld the rain.  After the people begged and pleaded for rain, the
Sun god unleashed a torrent which drowned the world.  The fourth sun was the
Water Sun.  The goddess Chalchiuhtlicue was chosen to be the Sun, but her
husband told her that she was not truly good, but only faked being good to win
the worship of the people.  In her grief, Chalchiuhtlicue cried tears of blood
for fifty-two years and drowned the world.  The fifth and present age is called
the Earthquake Sun.  The god Huitzilopochtli became the Sun god.  As the god of
fire and war he demands human sacrifice.  Should these sacrifices cease he
would destroy the world in a great earthquake.

Each of these previous four ages lasts for a particular length of time.  The
Jaguar Sun lasts for 676 years, the Wind Sun for 364 years, the Rain Sun for
312 years, and the Water Sun for 52 years.  If you do a bit of mental
arithmetic you might notice that all these periods are divisible by 13, the
cosmic number in Mesoamerican numerology.  Well, the previous four ages and
their association with the four cardinal directions led to another important
number in Mesoamerican numerology --- the number four.  The number four was
closely associated with the Sun, and through the Sun, the cosmos more
generally.  It was typically depicted as a quincunx --- a cross, often with the
Sun at its center.  Typically the number four was shown on the face of the Sun
god, and the Sun god is associated with the phrase "four are his paths."  The
conquistador Hernando Ruis de Alarcón described the significance of the number
four in 1629:

> Their use of the number four in all of their superstitions and idolatrous
> rites, such as the insufflations that they make when the sorcerers and false
> doctors conjure or evoke the Devil, the cause of which I was never able to
> track down until when I heard the story of the waiting for the sun. And for
> the same reason, the hunters, when they set their snares in order to catch
> deer, give four shouts toward the four parts of the world, asking for favor,
> and they put four crossed cords over a rock. The bowmen call four times to
> the deer, repeating four times the word tahui, which no one today
> understands, and they cry four times like a puma. They put a lighted candle
> on the tomb for a dead person on four successive days, and others throw a
> pitcher of water on it for him on four successive days. And, finally, among
> them the number four is venerated.

At the start of the two main seasons, the wet season and the dry season, the
high priests would make four sacrifices.  Mesoamerican towns typically had four
entrances.  From this association between the Sun, the mystical number four,
and the cardinal directions, we can see why the zenith passage of the Sun was
considered to be such a significant event.  At this time, the Sun stood in the
center of the world, equidistant from the four directions of north, south,
east, and west.

Well, we know from their depictions that Mesoamericans made even more detailed
observations of the Sun.  In fact, there's some evidence that Mesoamericans
even observed sunspots.  It seems to have been a practice of Mesoamerican
astronomers to observe the Sun directly through arrow holes in a shield.  In
Maya depictions of the Sun, the Sun is sometimes depicted with marks like
freckles on his cheek and other times is not.  If you correlate the dates of
these depictions against the Solar cycle you find that the Maya tended to draw
the Sun with spots on his cheek during periods of high solar activity, when
there were likely to be a lot of sunspots.

Perhaps the most famous Mesoamerican depiction of the Sun is the elaborate
Aztec Calendar Stone, also called the Aztec Sun Stone.  The stone was
originally carved sometime between 1502 and 1520, during the reign of Montezuma
II.  About half a century later, after the Conquest, the Archbishop of Mexico
ordered the stone to be buried along with a number of other artifacts in order
to put the memory of human sacrifice in the past.  Two centuries later in 1790,
the city was now known as Mexico City and was undergoing a burst of
infrastructure development.  On August 11 of that year workers were digging a
sewer when the stumbled on a massive statue called the Statue of Coatlicue.
This turned out to be a fortuitous day, because in Mesoamerican mythology, the
principal date of creation happens to be August 11.  Towards the end of the
year, the workers made another discovery, the enormous Sun Stone.  At this
point, in the late 18th century, the Enlightenment had been underway for some
time and the early colonial history of Mexico was in the distant past.  So the
rediscovery of these artifacts was treated with curiosity and was seen as a
piece of information about the country's forgotten past.  Upon its rediscovery
the Sun Stone was placed in the cathedral, and about a century later it moved
into a museum.  Over the years it became one of the most important symbols of
Mexico and since the 1990s it's appeared on the country's coins.

To briefly describe it, the stone is huge.  It's  a circle about twelve feet
across, three feet thick, and weighs more than 54,000 pounds.  The stone is
intricately carved and represents the major features of the Aztec understanding
of time.  At the very center is a depiction of either Tlaltecuhtli, the Earth
God, or Tonatiuh, the Sun God.  The depiction of this god is just the center of
a large hieroglyph that represents the word "earthquake."  This references the
age of the fifth Sun that we are today living in that will one day come to an
end in a great earthquake.  Then there are four symbols which form an X around
the central god.  These are the symbols for jaguar, wind, rain, and water,
representing the suns of the previous four ages.  Then around this is a ring
with the symbols for the 20 distinct day signs of the ritual year.  Outside of
this ring, arrows point the way to the four cardinal directions.  On the
outermost ring at the top of the circle there is a glyph which represents the
date 13 Reed, which is the start of the age of the fifth sun.  Finally, the
edge of the circle is inscribed with dots which have been interpreted to
represent the stars of the night sky.  So, this massive stone pulled together
the central elements of the Aztec conception of time: the changing of the ages,
the circular nature of the ritual cycle, and how it all revolved around the
center of the world its the meeting point of the four cardinal directions in
the Sun.  Hence the inspiration for this episode's title, the clock around the
rock.

Well, Mesoamerican conceptions of time went beyond the 52 year cycle of the
Calendar Round.  In addition to this cycle, there were much longer cycles
called the "long count."  The Maya conception of time was related to the phrase
"Jaloj-k'exoj," which could be translated to something like "change within
change."  Time progressed through a series of interlocking cycles.  In this
phrase, "jal" has the sense of the change that an individual experiences over
the course of his or her life.  One is born, becomes a child, grows into an
adult, and then ages and dies.  But on top of this kind of change, there was
also "k'ex" which has more the sense of "substitution."  So as individuals grow
up, a younger generation comes to replace the older generation.  The children
of a society become the parents, and the parents become the grandparents.  This
idea of substitution manifested itself in Maya society through the passing down
of family names.

Well, to describe the longer cycles of time in the Long Count, the
Mesoamericans used a rather simple but extremely powerful number system.
Numbers were written in base twenty.  You would would notate numbers up to four
with just so many dots.  Then when you got to five you would collect them into
a horizontal bar.  Six would be a bar with a dot on top.  Seven would be a bar
with two dots and so on.  Ten would be two bars, fifteen three bars.
Incidentally, this is the Maya practice, the Aztec would just write the five
dots in a horizontal line.  At any rate, once you got to twenty, you'd now have
a two digit number.  This next digit would be written the same way.  The genius
of the numbering system is that it included the numeral zero, denoted by a
glyph for a shell.  This makes the Mesoamericans plausibly the first
civilization to truly adopt a numeral for zero.

Given this numbering system, the Long Count was really pretty straightforward.
The fundamental unit was a day.  Twenty days make a month, and 13 days make up
a 360 day unit which is about a year long called a "tun" which literally
translates to "stone."  After this you just have successive groupings of 20.
20 years make a "k'atun."  20 k'atuns make up a "bak'tun."  The Long Count
cycle is then 20 of these bak'tuns.  The overall period of this is 7885 years.

During the classic period, the Maya generally recorded their dates using both
the solar cycle and ritual cycle, and also the date in the Long Count.  This is
fantastic for us, because unlike the date in the Calendar Round, which repeats
every 52 years, a date recorded in the Long Count is unique.  At least, as long
as you can match up where the Long Count fits next to the Western calendar.
The tricky thing here is that the Long Count had generally fallen out of use by
the time Europeans arrived.  This problem of matching up the Long Count against
the Western calendar is what is known in the field as the correlation problem.
Over the years there have been a number of proposals, but today the one that is
generally accepted is one of the first to have been proposed, by Joseph
Goodman.  Now, because the ritual cycle and solar cycle were still prevalent
all throughout Mesoamerica during the colonial era it was very easy to match up
the location in the Calendar Round to the Western date.  This essentially
restricts any Long Count date to a set of dates spaced 52 years apart.  But
Goodman found a clue in a colonial era record that a certain Maya nobleman
named Ahpula died on the sixth year after a k'atun ending on the ritual cycle
date 13 Ahaw.  This limited the number of possible correspondences between the
Long Count and the Western calendar.  Then by combining this result with Maya
records of lunar phases, he could establish a unique correspondence that more
or less fit all the available evidence.  In this solution, the beginning of the
Long Count cycle began on August 11, 3114 BC.  Over the years Mayanists have
accumulated more evidence and it generally agrees with Goodman's solution.  For
instance, one monument contains an inscription of a covered Sun followed by a
Long Count date.  If you use Goodman's solution to work out when that date was
in the Western calendar, you find that it is within a few days of a total solar
eclipse.  Mayanists today still debate exactly what the correspondence is and
whether it is the date Goodman suggested or if it is off by a couple of days.
Some correspondences fit better with the historical records, and others fit
better with the astronomical evidence.  It's also possible that at some point
over the centuries there was some reform to either the ritual cycle or the Long
Count that perhaps skipped over a couple of ominous days.  And just as an
aside, perhaps counterintuitively, these kinds of deviations from a regular
cycle are a sign of a highly centralized society.  Naively, you might think
that if a day got skipped it was just because a civilization was decaying and
people lost track of a day because they were just so busy worrying about their
survival.  But on a society wide scale this just doesn't happen.  Anytime you
have dates skipped in a calendar it is a sign of an extremely powerful and
centralized force in that society.  Historically, only a powerful central
figure has been able to impose a calendar change across a large population.  It
just doesn't happen otherwise.  We'll see this in more detail in a future
episode when we talk about the calendar reform of Pope Gregory.  During that
calendar reform, which erased 10 days from the calendar, it was only Catholic
countries who accepted the pope's authority that made the calendar change.  It
took Protestant countries much longer, in some cases centuries to accept the
reform.  And the more decentralized Eastern Orthodox Church has not accepted
this reform to this day.  At any rate, all this is to say that if there have
been some deviations in the Long Count, they probably would have happened in
the Classical Period, during a time of high centralization, maybe in the heyday
of Teotihuacan.

Well, the standard correlation between the Long Count and the Western calendar
puts its beginning at August 11, 3114 BC.  Now, this does not imply that the
calendar itself was actually created on August 11, 3114 BC.  There isn't really
any evidence of any true Maya civilization that early on.  This was a period of
transition towards agriculture.  What is more likely is that the calendar
developed sometime in the early first millennium BC, and the high priests fixed
the date of some significant event like a coronation to be midway through the
Long Count on some particularly auspicious date.

Well, the Mesoamericans considered the times when the longest cycles rolled
over to be particularly significant.  It was considered to be important when
the tun, k'atun, or bak'tun was 0, 5, 10, 13, or 15.  One especially momentous
event occurred on March 13, 692 AD, when Maya society celebrated the 9th
bak'tun and the 13th k'atun.  A number of Maya kingdoms built large monuments
to celebrate this occasion.  Every 13 k'atuns, the Long Count cycle would come
back in sync with the Calendar Round cycle, so this was seen as a kind of
repeat of history.  Over the course of a bak'tun, the rulers of the kingdom of
Palenque seem to have deliberately chosen their regal names to illustrate a
kind of folding back of time through the bak'tun.  The kings chose unique names
until they were halfway through the bak'tun.  Then, the names start to repeat
backwards.  So the ruler right after the halfway mark had the same name as his
predecessor.  The following ruler had the same name as the ruler one before
that, and so on, until the last ruler of the era had the same name as the
first.

This kind of thinking of time in terms of these discrete eras led to a belief
among Mesoamericans that a new bak'tun would herald a new era with new
characteristics.  This might even signal the end of a kingdom.  One theory for
the mysterious abandonment of Teotihuacan was that its residents may have
believed that its time had come to an end with the end of a bak'tun or ka'tun.

Well I can't talk about these major transitions in the Long Count without
bringing up the famous 2012 phenomenon.  Listeners of a certain age, myself
included, may remember that there was a lot of talk in the media about the Maya
in the years leading up to 2012.  Certain more excitable outlets claimed that
the Maya had predicted that the world would end at the end of the year 2012.
This was because December 21, 2012 was the end of the 13th bak'tun.  And given
that 13, of course, is the cosmic number and is associated with the date of
creation in Maya numerology, this would have been a particularly momentous
transition.  But the origin of all the fuss around the year 2012 actually only
comes from a single inscription in the archaeology.  And this rather makes
sense, the classical period was around 200--900, the year 2012 was more than a
thousand years off, so they didn't think much of it.  But near the city of
Palenque there was a small ruin named Tortuguero.  The ruin contains a stone
slab that was once part of a temple.  The slab has an inscription that reads
"At the end of the 13th bak'tun, it will happen that" --- and then there is a
huge crack in the stone and the rest of the line is gone.  On another line
there is a glyph which is rather hard to read, but is usually translated,
rather ominously, as "he will descend."  In another part there is a glyph which
is also hard to read but is generally taken to be a rather obscure god called
Bolon Yokte' K'uh.

So that's all there is to it.  That is all of the archaeological evidence we
have that the Maya thought that there was anything special about the year 2012.
How we got from this slab to people hyperventilating about Armageddon is more
of a 20th century story than a story about the Maya.  The 2012 phenomenon began
innocently enough.  The anthropologist Michael Coe described the Long Count in
a book of his in 1966, and as I have been doing, was talking about how the Maya
considered changes in the bak'tun roughly every four centuries to be
significant events.  He speculated that they probably would have considered the
end of the 13th bak'tun to also be significant, and possibly even especially
significant.  And he speculated that maybe, due to the association between the
number 13 and creation, they might have conceived of it as an Armageddon.

Well, these idle speculations by an anthropologist were later picked up by the
novelist and esoteric thinker Frank Waters in his 1975 book Mexico Mystique:
The Coming of the Sixth World of Consciousness.  This turned out to be a fairly
popular book, and in true 70s fashion, he took Michael Coe's ideas and
transcended them to a psychedelic new level.  He argued that the end of the
13th bak'tun in 2012 would usher in a new kind of human consciousness into the
world.

These ideas were then taken into an even more, shall we say, esoteric direction
by one of the major figures of the New Age movement, José Argüelles.  Beyond
his writings on the Maya calendar, Argüelles is perhaps best known as being one
of the creators of Earth Day, and one of the popularizers of the idea of the
noosphere, which will probably at least be familiar to any listeners who are
deep enough in the Bay Area tech scene.  Well, at any rate, Argüelles seems to
have become rather obsessed with the transformation that the world was going to
undergo in the year 2012 and in 1987 he penned a book called The Mayan Factor:
Path Beyond Technology.  The Mayanist David Stuart described it as a
"spectacularly incomprehensible yet popular treatise."  It's a little hard to
understand even in its barest outline, but the basic idea is that Argüello
claimed to be a messenger of the command of Pacal Votan, Pacal Votan being his
rendering of the names of one of the Maya rulers buried at Palenque.  In his
telling, the Maya were aliens.  They were galactic agents put on our planet to
"place earth and its solar system in synchronization with the larger galactic
community."  In the year 2012 not only would the 13th bak'tun end, but the
solar system would become aligned with the center of the galaxy.  This would
"[bode] nothing less than a major evolutionary upgrading of the light-life ---
radiogenetic --- process which our planet represents."  To prepare for this
momentous event, he set up the Galactic Research Institute, which operates to
this day.  Well, José Argüelles never lived to see the harmonic convergence
that he predicted. He died in 2011.  But as the momentous date approached a
flurry of books, articles, radio and television programs followed, the contents
of which were as often as not revealed to their authors in a hallucinogenic
trance.  And, to be fair, given that the only archaeological evidence
specifying the year 2012 was this single slab at Tortuguero, that left them
with precious few other sources of information about the event.

Well, I would be remiss if I didn't mention that the ruins at Tortuguero have
one other interesting astronomical connection.  There is a glyph inscribed on
one of the monuments there that appears on several other monuments throughout
Yucatán that has been called the "star war" glyph.  The glyph depicts the sign
for the Earth with a star above it.  To the side of the Earth are drops which
represent rain.  This glyph is one of a small number of glyphs which carry the
meaning of "war," and due to the star in it, it is called the "star war" glyph.
One prominent theory in Maya studies is that the star war glyph represented a
particular type of war that the Maya waged.  Now, as an aside, the
understanding of Maya warfare has undergone some rather dramatic changes since
the early days of Maya studies.  Prior to the decipherment of Maya hieroglyphs,
early archaeologists generally believed that the Maya were a peaceful
civilization in which warfare was largely unknown.  To the extent that
archaeologists from this era admitted that the Maya engaged in war, they would
say that it was a later practice that was brought in by the Aztec.  Even in the
early days when not much of substance was known about the Maya, this belief of
the Maya as a kind of noble savage civilization probably had more to do with
ethnologists' feelings about Western civilization after the catastrophes of
World War I and World War II than anything else.  Maya art and iconography has
no shortage of depictions of violence and these early ethnologists were well
aware of this.  But these ethnologists argued that these were more symbolic or
mythical, or served some sort of ritual purposes.

This thesis that the Maya were a peaceful people became untenable by the 1960s
as Maya hieroglyphs started to be deciphered.  As it became clear that many
monuments were erected to celebrate a king's victory in battle, no one could
seriously argue anymore that the Maya were pacifist.

At any rate, the Maya used multiple glyphs to denote words that we would
translate into the English as "war," but the "star war" glyph seems to have
represented the largest and most intense conflicts in which one kingdom
annihilated the ruling dynasty of another.  So, what does the star have to do
with the conflict?  In the 1970s, the Mayanist Floyd Lounsbury noticed that one
of these major battles denoted by a star war glyph was fought on August 2, 792
AD.  This corresponded to both the inferior conjunction of Venus and the zenith
passage of the Sun.  This has led to the hypothesis that the Maya timed their
wars based on certain astronomical events.  It's well known that among the Maya
Venus was associated with war in much the same way that Mars was in Ancient
Rome.  Proponents of the star war theory have noted that more than two-thirds
of the dates recorded with the star war glyph correspond to the first
appearance of Venus in the evening sky.  And in most of the remaining dates
Venus was visible as an evening star.  As intriguing as it is, the idea is
somewhat hard to test.  There are a number of dates recorded with the star war
glyph that don't seem correspond to any particular astronomical event.  So
whether these wars were only sometimes timed to the heavens, or if there was
some other phenomenon that they watched for, or if it was all a coincidence, we
can't really say.

But the idea that the heavens might indicate the end of a kingdom or the
transition to a new era was not unfamiliar to the Mesoamericans.  As with
virtually every other civilization on the planet, the Mesoamericans considered
comets to be bad omens.  And in 1517, two years before Hernán Cortés arrived,
the Aztecs noticed that a comet had appeared in the sky.  It was described as
"a wound in the sky, wide at its base and narrow at its peak."  And this was
not the only bad omen of the year.  There had earlier been a very bright meteor
and then a fire had broken out in the Temple of Huitzilopochitli, the god of
war.  Then, strange rumors began to circulate coming from people out on the
coasts reporting that they had seen floating houses in the ocean.  Needing to
know what all this meant, the Emperor Montezuma II brought before him all his
high priests and astrologers and demanded that they tell him the significance
of this comet and all the other strange tidings besides.  But, as in Western
astrology, besides being a generally bad sign, comets had no particular
astrological interpretation in Aztec astrology.  The best that the emperor's
astrologers could muster was a Delphic prediction that "the Emperor will behold
and suffer a great mystery."  Knowing that this brief statement was unlikely to
satisfy the emperor for long, the astrologers fled the capital that night.
When the Emperor had discovered that they had fled, he killed their families in
retaliation.

Well, of course, two years later Hernán Cortés arrived on the North American
mainland, and two years after that, he was able to overthrow the largest empire
that the Americas had seen, in no small part thanks to the help of other
Mesoamerican peoples that the Aztecs had previously subjugated.  By 1546 the
Spanish had also conquered the Yucatán peninsula.  Due to the missionary
efforts of, among others, Bishop Landa, whom we heard about earlier, many of
the Maya on the Yucatán peninsula converted to Christianity and became subjects
of the Spanish crown.  But other Maya groups retreated into the dense jungle
further to the south where the Spanish were unable to reach them.  After the
Spanish controlled Yucatán, isolated pockets of Maya self-rule nevertheless
persisted for another 150 years.

One of the most important of these was the Itzá Kingdom which had a population
of some tens of thousands of Maya.  Its fall is a revealing case study in the
Mesoamerican conception of time, and how changes in the eras of the Long Count
could create a political reality.  The Itzá kingdom was able to maintain their
independence for so long because the tropical jungle made it very difficult for
the Spanish to travel to them in large enough numbers to invade.  But this was
not for lack of trying.  During the 16th century, Spain had established two
major footholds south of the area occupied by the Aztec Empire that was now
known as New Spain.  One of these was the Yucatán peninsula.  The other was in
what is now Guatemala along the Pacific coast.  The existence of the Itzá
Kingdom in between these two settlements was a major geopolitical problem for
the Spanish since it prevented the construction of a road connecting these two.
This road was doubly important because not only was it a link between two major
Spanish settlements, but it would also connect the Atlantic Ocean to the
Pacific Ocean.

Well, over the years there was sporadic contact between the Itzá Kingdom and
the Spanish.  The initial contact came quite early on and actually left a major
impression on Itzá culture.  Without getting too deep into the details of the
internal politics of the Conquistadors, this period was a wild time.  The
Chinese have a saying that "the mountains are high and the emperor is far
away," to, in effect, describe the practical limitations of governing distant
provinces.  Well, during this time we might say that "the Atlantic Ocean is
wide and the King far away."  Here was a vast continent, its land ripe for the
taking by anyone who had the means and will to do so.  How could the King of
Spain ensure that these newly conquered lands, which were nominally conquered
in his name, actually came under his control?  This was not some idle worry.
Cortés's invasion of the Aztec Empire was actually a rogue operation, done
against express orders of the Governor of Cuba.  The only reason he wasn't hung
for his treason was that his invasion turned out to be so spectacularly
successful.  In recognition of this, the King appointed Cortés to be governor
of New Spain, but he also appointed four court officials to "assist" Cortés,
essentially ensuring that someone loyal to the crown would keep a close eye on
him.  Cortés, in turn, chafed under what he felt was insufficient recognition
of his accomplishments in conquering New Spain.  To make matters more
complicated, although he had managed to conquer the Aztec Empire with the help
of other subjugated indigenous groups, everyone was aware that this was an
"enemy of my enemy" situation, and they owed him no particular loyalty.

Well, the Governor of Cuba was worried about Cortés's increasing power.  So he
convinced one of the Conquistadors who was a kind of mentee of his, but also
one of Cortés's key men, to break away from Cortés and rule in Honduras in his
own right, still nominally loyal to the Spanish crown, but independent of
Cortés.  In response to this, Cortés led a force of his conquistadors through
the dense jungle down into Honduras to bring this rebellion under his heel.
This trek was uniformly described by the conquistadors as the single most
grueling journey of their entire life.  Well, as it happens, the trek took
Cortés and his men through the Itzá kingdom.  Despite some initial suspicions,
the Itzá king ultimately allowed these beleaguered strangers to stay a few days
in his court and pass through the kingdom.  Apparently the king and Cortés got
on well with each other, and the king provided them with directions for how
best to reach the location in Honduras that Cortés was aiming for.  But what
made the biggest impression on the Itzá people were the horses the Spanish had
brought.  Horses, of course, are not native to the Americas, or more
accurately, native American horses had gone extinct thousands of years prior,
so the Itzá people had never seen such a magnificent beast.  One of Cortés's
horses had injured its foot in the trek and was unable to walk, so Cortés
agreed to leave the horse with the Itzá and they promised that they would treat
the horse well.  The Itzá took the horse to be a divine being, named it
Tziminchaak, and the high priests fed it only foods proper to the gods: a
steady diet of flowers and birds.  Naturally the horse starved to death, but
the Itzá kept Tziminchaak in their memory by carving its image in stone and
venerating its remains.

Well, nearly a century passed before there was another encounter between the
Spanish and the Itzá Kingdom.  In 1617, a Franciscan friar named Fray Juan de
Orbita was inspired by the records of Cortés's travels that told of this
mysterious kingdom deep in the jungle replete with magnificent temples and
palaces and made the dangerous journey to rediscover it.  He seemed to have
some success in this mission.  He converted several Itzá people and the king of
the Itzá people told him that he was open to the Christian faith.  At the
encouragement of Fray Orbita he even put up a cross in his palace.

So, after this encouraging start, Fray Orbita revisited the kingdom a year
later with a companion, Fray Bortolomé de Fuensalida.  His goal now was to
convert some more of the common people and hopefully a courageous nobleman or
two.  But he was surprised to find that upon his return there seemed to be
absolutely no interest from anyone in converting to Christianity.  In Orbita's
words, the Itzá nobles told him that "it was not time to be Christians ... and
that they should go back to where they had come from; they could come back
another time, but right then they did not want to be Christians."

Later in the day after this rejection, Orbita and Fuensalida were taken to the
Itzá temple, and there saw the various idols, including the idol to
Tziminchaak, Cortés's old horse.  Idols and Franciscan missionaries are
something like matter and antimatter, and as soon as he saw it, Orbita smashed
the precious idol to Tziminchaak, which led to a tremendous outcry from the
people when word got out.

Orbita and his companion were taken before the king and they convinced him to
grant them a private audience.  There, they and talked to him about the
Christian message and how important it was for the souls of him and his people
that he convert to Christianity.  But, again in Orbita's words, the king
responded, "It is not yet time to abandon our gods.... Now is the age of Three
Ahaw.  The prophecies tell us the time will yet come to abandon our gods, years
from now, in the age of Eight Ahaw.  We will speak no more of this now.  You
would best leave us and return another time."  Well, in this intervening time
several noblemen began to gather warriors outside to exact their revenge on
Orbita and Fuensalida for their blasphemy, and so Orbita and Fuensalida had to
flee the kingdom for their own safety.

Now, Frays Orbita and Fuensalida did not realize it, but the year that they
made their second journey to the Itzá kingdom, 1618, was one of the rare
changes in the bak'tun that happens every four centuries.  In fact, the next
change of a bak'tun was none other than the one a few years ago in 2012.  It's
possible that this change of a bak'tun instigated a more fervent worship of the
traditional gods.  But each subsequent ka'tun every twenty years brought with
it a new era.  And the Itzá priests prophesied that in Eight Ahaw, four ka'tuns
later, a new era with a new religion would begin.

Well, a few years after the journey of Frays Orbita and Fuensalida, the Spanish
sent a much larger armed expedition with about a hundred men, both Spanish and
Maya, to help move the conversion process along.  But Fray Orbita's destruction
the idols in the temple was still fresh in the minds of the Itzá people.  Upon
their arrival, they were all taken prisoner and told that they would be
sacrificed in atonement for the blasphemy that Fray Orbita had committed.  More
than 90 of the men were killed, sacrificed to the gods with their hearts ripped
out of their chests.  A few of the group were spared so that they could take
the story back to the Spanish with the message that the Itzá wanted to be left
alone.  Over the decades there were a few more half-hearted attempts to convert
the Itzá, but they all met with a similar grisly end.

By the end of the 17th century, the Spanish presence in the New World had been
growing exponentially, and the larger population was putting pressure on the
border with the Itzá Kingdom.  The Itzá would conduct raids into neighboring
lands, and the Spanish still couldn't build their long desired road connecting
Yucatán and Guatemala.  On the Itzá side, their raids had impressed on them the
value of Western goods, particularly machetes.  So, with the memory of Fray
Orbita's destruction of the temple out of living memory, there was more
willingness on the part of the Itzá to build diplomatic relationships with the
Spanish.  And, of course, the age of Eight Ahaw was fast approaching.

Well, the records from Frays Orbita and Fuensalida had indicated the importance
of this new era and the prophecy that was associated with it, and now, decades
later, another Franciscan, named Fray Avendaño realized that it was soon coming
to pass.  This was the golden moment to convert the Itzá people.  Fray Avendaño
spent years planning for this mission by studying any documents on the Maya
religion and Maya prophecies that he could get his hands on.

Many of these survive in what we today call the Books of Chilam Balam that I
discussed earlier.  And as I also mentioned, every 13 ka'tuns, roughly 256
years, the Long Count cycle would sync back up with the Calendar Round cycle
and this was seen as a kind of repetition of history.  So what were the Maya
prophecies of the age of 8 Ahaw?  Well, as the Books of Chilam Balam describe
the history across the ages of time, a theme that emerges is that the arrival
of 8 Ahaw is associated with upheaval and destruction.  One passage says,

> 8 Ahaw was when Chichen Itzá was abandoned.  There were thirteen folds of
> ka'tuns when they established their houses at Chakanputun.

After 13 ka'tuns, Chakanputun is in turn abandoned.  13 ka'tuns later the Itzá
abandoned their homes yet again.  The text says,

> 8 Ahau was when the Itzá men again abandoned their homes because of the
> treachery of Hunac Ceel, because of the banquet with the people of Izamal,
> For thirteen folds of Katuns they had dwelt there, when they were driven out
> by Hunac Ceel because of the giving of the questionnaire of the Itzá

So, the Itzá people knew from their prophetic histories that the arrival, once
again, of the ka'tun called 8 Ahaw in 1697, would usher in yet another
upheaval.

So, early in 1697, Fray Avendaño departed for the capital of the Itzá Kingdom
with a small party.  Upon his arrival he came upon a number of commoners.  The
women and children ran away yelling to alert the people of the arrival of
foreigners, and the men greeted the party by pointing bows and arrows at them.
Fray Avendaño approached the men with open arms to show that he was unarmed,
offered them gifts of things from Spain, and embraced the men when it was clear
that he posed no threat.  Fray Avendaño intended to give these men a few token
gifts and save the bulk of his gifts for the king, but to his dismay the men
carted away nearly everything he had brought.  Nevertheless, he was able to
spend the night peacefully with some of the Itzá commoners.

The next morning, news of the Spaniards' arrival had reached the king, so the
missionary party went to the shore of the Lake Petén Itzá and waited for the
king to arrive and grant him an audience.  At around two in the afternoon the
king made a grand entrance, sailing across the lake shore on eight canoes full
of men dressed in battle attire.  Fray Avendaño had expected that on the shore
he would formally greet the king and announce the reason for his visit.  But
instead he was immediately grabbed by the king's guards, stuffed onto a canoe,
and taken to the king's royal canoe where he would be transported to the palace
on an island in the middle of the lake.  On route to the island, Fray Avendaño
then recorded that the following happened:

> Suddenly the king placed his hand on my heart to see if it was at all
> agitated, and at the same time he asked me if I was so. I, who was before
> very glad to observe that my wishes and the work of my journey were being
> realized, replied to him, “Why should my heart be disturbed? Rather it is
> very contented, seeing that I am the fortunate man who is fulfilling your own
> prophecies, by which you are to become Christians; and this benefit will come
> to you by means of some bearded men from the East, who by the signs of their
> prophets we ourselves, because we came many leagues from the direction of the
> east, plowing the seas with no other purpose than to bring them, borne by the
> love of their souls (and at the cost of much work), to that favor which the
> true God shows them.” I at this time, with some liberty on my part, also
> placed my hand on his breast and heart, asking him also if his was disturbed,
> and he said: “No.” To which I replied: “If you are not disturbed at seeing
> me, who am the minister of the true God, different in everything from you—in
> dress, customs, and color, so that I inspire fear in the devil, and if your
> heart is not troubled, why should you expect me to be afraid of you, mere men
> like myself, whom I come purposely to seek, with great pleasure, merely for
> the love which I have for their souls, and having found them, in order to
> announce to them the law of the true god, as you shall hear when we come to
> the Peten.”

Upon their arrival, the priests were taken up to the temple and palace where
they came upon the altar upon which some hundred of their confreres had been
sacrificed years ago.  But the priests were taken past the altar and into an
antechamber of the king's palace where they were given food and drink.
Finally, the men were asked the purpose of their visit.  In his exhaustive
preparations, Fray Avendaño had written a letter in the native language
explaining that, in accordance with their prophecies, he was here to convert
them to the true faith.  The antechamber had no windows and he could hardly
make out his letter, so he asked if they could move outside into the daylight.
And there, before a crowd of people he proclaimed his letter.

The response to this letter from everyone listening, from the nobility to the
commoners was neither positive nor negative.  Just confusion.  When Fray
Avendaño penned his letter, he wrote it in an extremely formal diplomatic
style, and if you've ever read any formal European diplomatic letters from the
late 17th century, you'll know that this language was baroque, to say the
least.  Then Fray Avendaño translated the letter rather literally into the
native language of the Itzá people.  The result was a letter that was
essentially incomprehensible.  When the Itzá noblemen told him they had no idea
what he was saying, he decided to put the letter aside and try to explain his
purpose extemporaneously in more direct language.  He described how their
prophecies indicated that in the age of 8 Ahaw, a time of great change was upon
them.  This change, he declared, was to be their conversion to the Christian
faith.  Would they put aside their old gods and worship this new figure, Jesus
Christ?  Now that the Itzá finally understood what Fray Avendaño was here to
do, the king told him to wait there a little while as they thought about it.

During his deliberations the king forbade the people from engaging with the
Spaniards.  But the people found these foreigners to be so exotic that they
completely ignored this prohibition and huge groups of commoners came to see
the Spaniards at all hours of the day and night.

Well, the king of the Itzá truly believed that the age of 8 Ahaw would usher in
a time of destruction and upheaval, and was convinced by the foreigner's
detailed knowledge of this prophecy that was supposed to have been the secret
knowledge of his high priests.  After a few days he decided that he and two of
his high priests would get baptized.  As a kind of test run he first offered up
his own son to see what would happen.  After the boy had the holy water poured
upon him and seemed to suffer no ill consequences, the king and high priests
underwent the ceremony as well.

Well, the Itzá nobility were by no means unified behind the king's decision.
Several noblemen and the queen herself were aghast that the king was abandoning
their gods and capitulating to their enemy, the Spanish.  Within a few days it
the king learned that of a plot to murder the Spaniards, so he urged them to
leave.  Like their predecessors decades ago, the Spanish missionaries escaped
the Itzá kingdom under the cover of darkness.

But, at this point, the patience of the Spanish authorities for the Itzá
kingdom had worn out.  A few months after Fray Avendaño and his party escaped,
the authorities sent a much larger military force consisting of hundreds of
troops and even artillery with the purpose of deposing the kingdom.  But when
the force arrived at the kingdom they were astonished to find that there was
nothing to conquer.  They had arrived at a ghost town.  The capital had been
almost completely abandoned.  As the prophecies had foretold, the arrival of
the age of 8 Ahaw had led to the Itzá people abandoning their home, just as
they had done innumerable times in ages past.

The troops set about their work of converting the pagan temples to Christian
churches, and in the process of destroying the pagan idols they came across a
box hung from the ceiling over a shrine that was filled with horse bones.  An
elderly Itzá woman who had been too old to leave the city told the Spanish that
those were the bones of Tziminchaak, the horse that Cortés had left centuries
earlier.

Well, speaking of ends of eras, with this we'll wrap up not only our tour of
Mesoamerican astronomy, but our tour of non-Western astronomy more generally.
Ordinarily I would at this point tell you what next month's episode will be
about, but I'm afraid I have to say that there will be no episode next month.
Now that we've come to a natural stopping point in the narrative I've decided
to take a bit of a break.  I've been faithfully putting out episodes every full
moon now for nearly four years, and this one marks episode number forty-seven.
In all, I've written nearly 450,000 words for this show, which is about the
length of the Lord of the Rings.  But as some of you may have noticed, the
episodes have started to come a bit late.  So, I'm taking some time to catch up
on the reading I need to do for the next phase of the show and also work on a
few other projects that I've been neglecting these past couple of years.  But
don't worry, the Song of Urania is not going away for good.  The next episode
will come out in about a year's time, at the first full moon of 2026.  Then we
will transition into what we might consider the next season of the show.  If we
were to divide the show into seasons, the first would have been the astronomy
of the ancient world, with the episodes on Babylonian, Greek, and Roman
astronomy.  Then this second season, which we're wrapping up in this episode,
covered what we might very loosely call the history of non-Western astronomy.
In the third season will cover medieval astronomy, starting with the astronomy
of the Islamic world, and then transitioning into astronomy in Christendom.
So, you'll have to wait a little longer than usual for the next episode, but I
hope that when it comes the wait will be worth it.  So, until the next full
moon of 2026, good night, and clear skies.

## Additional Resources

* Stuart, The Order of Days
